{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang3081\deflangfe3081{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Cambria;}{\f1\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Calibri;}{\f2\froman\fprq2\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f3\froman\fcharset0 Sabon-ItalicOsF;}{\f4\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fmodern\fprq1\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f6\fnil\fprq2\fcharset2 Wingdings;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset0 FuturaStd-Heavy;}{\f8\froman\fcharset238 SabonLTStd-Roman;}{\f9\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Calibri Light;}}
{\colortbl ;\red54\green95\blue145;\red79\green129\blue189;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red217\green217\blue217;\red214\green227\blue188;\red242\green242\blue242;\red191\green191\blue191;}
{\stylesheet{ Normal;}{\s1 heading 1;}{\s2 heading 2;}{\s3 heading 3;}{\s4 heading 4;}}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.21.2510;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\keep\keepn\s1\sb480\sa120\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf1\lang1033\b\i\f0\fs32 Cthulhu Eternal:\i0  An Any-Time Lovecraftian Roleplaying Game\par
\pard\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw10\brsp20 \keep\keepn\s1\sl276\slmult1\qc\i OGL System Reference Document \par
\pard\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw10\brsp20 \sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\i0\f1\fs22\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1\fs4\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sl276\slmult1\qc\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Localization for \lang3081 Medieval Era\lang1033  Settings\par
\pard\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw10\brsp20 \keep\keepn\s2\sa300\sl276\slmult1\qc Document Version \lang3081 1\lang1033\f1\tab\tab\f0  Released \lang3081 29 April,\lang1033  \lang3081 2023\lang1033\f1\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\i\fs22 Credits:\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\b0 Original Writing: Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave\lang3081  \lang1033 Sokolowski, Christopher Smith Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O\rquote Neil.\par
Additional Writing: Michelle Bernay-Rogers, Paul Franzese.\par
Rules updates: Noah Cline.\par
Localization of Cthulhu Eternal for the \lang3081 Medieval Era\lang1033  Setting: \lang3081 Chad J. Bowser\lang1033\par
Cover art by: \lang3081 Stock Art.\lang1033\par
Special help and enthusiasm: Matt Wiseman, Paul StJohn Mackintosh.\par
Copyright \'a9 \lang3081 2023\lang1033  by Cthulhu Reborn Publishing.\par
The name Cthulhu Eternal and the associated logo are Trademarks of Cthulhu Reborn Publishing.\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 For full OGL License Details including statements of Product Identity and Open Content see end of document.\par
\pard\brdrb\brdrs\brdrw10\brsp20 \sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\i0\f0\fs28 What Is \i Cthulhu Eternal?\i0\f1\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\i\fs22 Cthulhu Eternal\i0  is a tabletop roleplaying game which allows you to play out a broad range of investigative adventures in different eras of history, as tainted by the ravages of H.P. Lovecraft\rquote s Cthulhu Mythos. \par
The only assumptions made by the \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  rules are that:\par
\pard\fi-360\li765\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The game takes place in an era of our planet\rquote s past, present, or future where humanity is the prevailing \endash  although not necessarily only \endash  species actively shaping the world.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The world is haunted by secret and mysterious survivals of otherworldly or extra-dimensional forces of Lovecraft\rquote s mythos; clues to their existence are scattered through written accounts (if such exist) or folktales passed from generation-to-generation.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Players take on roles of everyday people from the era, without special pulp-like \ldblquote super-powers\rdblquote ; regardless of their frailty they pursue the truth about the Cthulhu Mythos and ultimately work to thwart its corrosive influence.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Player characters are physical human beings that can be hurt, fall unconscious, or die if subject to physical damage \endash  and conversely, they can be healed using whatever knowledge of \ldblquote first aid\rdblquote  exists in the historical era.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Player characters are conscious and intelligent beings whose sanity can be adversely affected by witnessing terrible things beyond normal human comprehension \endash  and conversely, they can have their mental state made better by whatever folk-remedies or medical science exists in the historical era.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang3081\b\f0\fs28 Welcome to \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Medieval \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang1033\b0\f1\fs22 Muddy streets, violence, few areas of learning, rampant disease. Worried monks pray when the sea wolves are spotted but are blind to the horrors lurking in their scriptorium. A brave and bold knight pledges his love to a lady and receives his favor but pays no intention to the strange script on the gold band. A group of traveling pilgrims sing the songs of their Lord and offer his blessings to all in need. When they stop at a way house, who has more to fear the pilgrims and their strange beliefs or the locals and their strange beliefs? The \i druhzniki\i0  know there\rquote s nothing to fear in the woods except for the old woman and her rituals. A doctor looks out over the corpse strewn village center and knows this is only the harbinger of worse.\par
The Medieval period is one not typically associated with investigative horror, especially cosmic horror.  One question that frequently occurs is, how can player characters investigate cosmic horrors when cosmic horror\rquote s core conceit is that mankind\rquote s belief in the rational world is slowly, irrevocably being proven false and the medieval period, pre-industrial as it is, doesn\rquote t have a rational world to be melted away like January\rquote s ice on the Thames, exposing a dark, smelly meaningless morass underneath? Honestly, if a dark horror from beyond space and time disproves quantum physics to a villein from Winchester, he\rquote s not going to care. \par
Well, cosmic horror is all about the truths behind a world view being obliterated. During the Medieval period, science, progress, and rational thought are not the dominate worldview. That\rquote s for later in history as industrialization and the later scientific cosmology takes hold. Instead, during the Medieval period, those cosmic horrors are slowly, inexorably nibbling away at the corners of religion, the natural world, and social stratification \endash  what were cornerstones to the medieval mind understanding its world.\par
It\rquote s also important to realize investigative horror is very possible in a medieval world. And the player characters don\rquote t even need to have a modern worldview like a certain crime-investigating monk. Investigation is all about looking for clues, separating the wheat from the chaff, and arriving at conclusions. Crimes were investigated all the time. That was the primary task of many officials. They just used different tools and approached the problems from different angles. In other words, Medieval people weren\rquote t too stupid to solve investigations. They were just ignorant of many of the modern techniques players are used to. Because they didn\rquote t exist yet.\par
The \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  \i Medieval SRD\i0  covers a timeline that spans from 500 CE to 1300 CE and focuses geographically and culturally on Europe. This is a large span of time and can be broken down into two roughly defined periods:\par
\pard\fi-720\li1080\sa160\sl252\slmult1\bullet\tab Early Medieval spans 500 CE to 1000 CE\par
\bullet\tab High Medieval spans 1000 CE to 1300 CE\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 That\rquote s 800 years of history to cover. This SRD will cover the subject in the broadest of strokes. Future supplements will delve into chronological or geographical specifics.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang3081\b\f0\fs28 Investigations in an Age Medieval\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang1033\b0\f1\fs22 Much of the fiction that introduced the Cthulhu Mythos relies on reading only diaries, family histories, and newspaper accounts. The games that grew to emulate the cosmic horror genre relied on that same vehicle, written clues, to try to create a mystery for players to solve through their characters.\par
In a game set in a time where most people are illiterate, how can those clues be generated? Prior to widespread literacy information was still spread and consumed. It just used different forms and Game Masters can use those methods to provide clues to the player characters.\par
\b Folklore:\b0  When people gather, they tell stories. Many of those stories have a grain of truth to them. Stories can take the place of many Mythos tomes, with the added benefit that the same story can shift and change over time and geography. Player characters can encounter tales that seem wildly divergent that can be traced back to the same horrific origins.\par
\b Observation:\b0  People notice the world around them and get used to its rhythms and expected patterns. When those are upended, even slightly, people become nervous. The Mythos causes these interruptions in the world and people can learn about the Mythos in this manner. A hunter knows a deer, inside and out, but when he dresses one and finds it\rquote s infested with a writhing mass of worms that has completely replaced its internal organs. \par
\b The Written Word:\b0  The written word existed during the Medieval age. The tomes and grimoires that many people associate with investigative horror gaming only appeared in any quantity in the final 150 years or so of the era. Instead, clues might be hidden in bulls, pipe rolls, charters, contracts, and chronicles. Given the low literacy rate, player characters will need to determine if finding someone to read the document is worth the risk \endash  and the cost.\par
\b Communication:\b0  A lot of investigation boils down to communication. In the Medieval age communication between communities takes longer. In a world with slower communication, it\rquote s much easier for the Mythos to grab footholds in communities and never let go. \par
But within communities, word spreads fast and memories are long. Talking to people, asking questions, and listening to conversations and gossip is an excellent way for player characters to learn the truth about what\rquote s going on. In the absence of writing, stories, fables, and other elements of the oral tradition are used to retain and pass down information. People, or frequently groups of people, with prodigious memories could be considered the libraries of their day.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang3081\b\f0\fs26 History or Fantasy\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang1033\b0\i\f1\fs22 Cthulhu Eternal\i0  \i Medieval\i0  can be run as a historical setting, a dark fantasy setting, or anywhere in between. There\rquote s a concern that adding Mythos monsters into a historical Medieval setting runs the risk of turning the game into a straight-up fantasy game featuring creatures with unpronounceable names. \par
That could be a valid concern, but Medieval people were no more powerful than modern day investigators. If a creature is unaffected by shotgun blasts, a sword is going to be even worse because the wielder needs to get that much closer to the creature to use it.\par
While it\rquote s very easy to throw monster after monster at the player characters and turn the game into a dungeon crawl or Mythos hoedown, the Game Master can use the same tools they use in any era to ensure the game is investigative horror not hack-and-slash fantasy.\par
Rather than add Mythos monsters to create a fantasy world, Cthulhu Eternal Medieval aims to use those Mythos entities to create a legend haunted world. It\rquote s not likely that deep ones will take to the battlefield, but they might visit an otherwise unremarkable hamlet, one with long ties to the sea and numerous eligible partners.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 The Spiritual Being\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The Medieval Era in Europe was a spiritual one. The church dominated society and politics, often ruthlessly enforcing their views on those deemed unbelievers or heretics. The church\rquote s power waxed and waned throughout the period covered by this book, but religion always played a role in peoples\rquote  lives. It was the filter through which they interacted with the world. \par
Those who didn\rquote t want to run afoul of the powers that be toed the line unless they felt they had enough temporal power to stand up to church. And were usually brutally beaten down.\par
Those who deal with investigations into unnatural events or even scientific matters, are wise to couch their actions and findings with at least a nod to church. A healer knows which tincture will cure the infection, but always cautions the patient to pray.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 The Medieval Mind\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1\fs22 Another question is how can a game where one of the core mechanics is the slow erosion of mental stability brought on by investigating the unnatural accurately portray a society that doesn\rquote t have a modern psychological view point?\par
While it\rquote s true that the people of the Middle Ages didn\rquote t have terms for post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, or psychopathy, the illnesses existed. What the Medieval people did understand was that trauma affects the mind and soul as much as it does the body, and people can suffer from afflictions of the mind and soul that show no physical wounds. The illnesses were there, the names for those illnesses were not.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 What Lies Ahead?\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Throughout this system reference document, rules will be provided to allow Game Masters to run investigative horror in the Medieval Age. No detailed setting is provided, but one isn\rquote t necessary to start playing the game.\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\pagebb\s1\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\b\f0\fs28 PART I: RULES OF THE GAME\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 This section describes the rules that all players will need to know to play a game of \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 . It describes:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 How to \b create characters\b0  whose roles players will adopt in the shared Lovecraftian stories;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 How characters make use of their \b skills and attributes\b0  to try to overcome challenges they encounter;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 How \b combat\b0  works, when things turn violent;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 How the fragile \b sanity\b0  of each player\rquote s character may become eroded by encounters with horrors, both mundane and unnatural;\par
\pard\fi-357\li714\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 What player characters can do during the quiet \b downtime\b0  between perilous adventures against unnatural entities.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-431\li431\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 1.0\tab Core Game Concepts\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 These rules tell you everything you need to know in order to play \i Cthulhu Eternal\f3 .\par
\i0\f1 As with most tabletop roleplaying games, when playing \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  one player takes on the responsibility of setting the scene and narrating the events which make up a \i Cthulhu Eternal \i0 adventure. That individual is termed the \b Game Moderator\b0 . All other players take on the roles of individual every-day people from an era of human history who are swept up in investigating the Cthulhu Mythos. These characters are called \b Protagonists\b0  (with the term capitalized for clarity). Protagonists will encounter a multitude of other characters whose roles are \i not\i0  being played by other players \endash  those characters are called \b Non-Player Characters\b0  (or NPCs) and their actions are controlled by the Game Moderator.\par
In this book you\rquote ll find rules for creating Protagonists and a full set of rules for running adventures in a Lovecraftian world of your group\rquote s choosing or devising.\par
In addition to this book, you also need pencils to record changes to your character sheet, scratch paper to draw sketches and take notes, and dice.\par
\i Cthulhu Eternal\f3  \i0\f1 uses polyhedral dice common to tabletop role-playing games: four-sided, six-sided, eight-sided, ten-sided, twelve-sided, and twenty-sided. The game plays best when you have a few of each on the table. Or you can find automated dice rollers on the Web and as mobile apps.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 1.1\tab Rolling the Dice\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 When the rules need you to roll dice, they use a particular nomenclature to save time and space: \ldblquote #D#,\rdblquote  as in \ldblquote 1D8\rdblquote  or \ldblquote 4D6.\rdblquote  The first number is the number of dice. The \ldblquote D\rdblquote  stands for \ldblquote dice with the following number of sides.\rdblquote  The second number is the number of faces on the die. \ldblquote 1D8\rdblquote  means roll one eight-sided die. \ldblquote 4D6\rdblquote  means roll four six-sided dice and add the numbers together. Sometimes you add or subtract a number from the roll. If it says \ldblquote 1D6+2,\rdblquote  that means roll one six-sided die and add two to the result.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 1.2\tab Percentile Dice (\ldblquote 1D100\rdblquote )\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Actions in \i Cthulhu Eternal\f3  \i0\f1 are resolved using \b percentile dice.\b0  That means you roll two ten-sided dice to get a number from 1 to 100. To do this, you don\rquote t add the individual die values together but instead treat each number as a digit (0\emdash 9). Before you make the roll, designate one die as the tens digit and the other as the ones digit. A zero (0) on the tens die counts as zero except when the ones die is also 0; then the 0 on the tens die counts as 10. For example:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The tens die comes up \ldblquote 0\rdblquote  and the ones die comes up \ldblquote 3\rdblquote : 03, or 3.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The tens die comes up \ldblquote 3\rdblquote  and the ones die comes up \ldblquote 0\rdblquote : 30.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Both dice come up \ldblquote 0\rdblquote : 100.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The tens die comes up \ldblquote 6\rdblquote  and the ones die comes up \ldblquote 2\rdblquote : 62.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 2.0\tab Protagonists\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Your Protagonist represents the fictional persona that you will control in the game. You will spend a lot of time navigating your Protagonist through exciting and dangerous situations, so it is worth investing time in creating a character you will enjoy playing.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.1\tab What Makes a Protagonist\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 All Protagonists are composed of six elements:\par
\b STATISTICS (STATS):\b0  Core capabilities for every Protagonist.\par
\b DERIVED ATTRIBUTES:\b0  Ratings that indicate physical and mental resilience, derived from stats.\par
\b ARCHETYPE:\b0  The type of role your Protagonist performs, which informs how many skill points and Bonds he or she has.\par
\b SKILLS:\b0  What training and education your Protagonist has picked up from being taught, or from life in general.\par
\b RESOURCES:\b0  An abstract rating that reflects your Protagonist\rquote s access to useful equipment or items.\par
\b BONDS:\b0  The people and communities your Protagonist fights to protect.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.2\tab Protagonist Creation\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Follow these steps to create a new Protagonist, or see \b HOW TO CREATE A PROTAGONIST\b0  on page \lang3081 8\lang1033  for a quick reference.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.1\tab STEP 0: Establish Harshness of Protagonist\rquote s Upbringing\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Most Medieval Protagonist\rquote s upbringings will have been tough, although a few may have had an easier childhood and others might have grown up in nightmarish circumstances.  Between you and the Game Moderator, decide whether the upbringing you envisage is best characterized by the descriptor \b Normal(-ish)\b0 , \b Harsh\b0 , or \b Very Harsh\b0 . The default for Medieval settings is Harsh, as described on page \lang3081 10\lang1033 .\par
Usually, an upbringing warranting the descriptor \b Harsh\b0  will involve the Protagonist having spent at least 3-4 years of adolescence in a highly dangerous or adverse situation that only affected the specific region. This calamity is likely to have caused the untimely death of at least a couple of the character\rquote s immediate family.\par
For an upbringing to be considered \b Very Harsh\b0 , the whole of the Protagonists childhood and adolescence was likely marred by a dangerous, deadly, or otherwise toxic environment that was particular to their region. This terrible situation is likely to have resulted in the majority of the characters\rquote  family suffering greatly, with at least half having perished.\par
Any upbringing that isn\rquote t \b Harsh\b0  or \b Very Harsh\b0  is considered \b Normal(-ish).\b0\par
A harsher upbringing might make him or her a little stronger or hardier (since only the strong and hardy would have survived), but at the cost of mental scarring from the many horrific sights marring their childhood. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.2\tab STEP 1: Determine Statistics\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Statistics are Strength (STR), Dexterity (DEX), Constitution (CON), Intelligence (INT), Power (POW), and Charisma (CHA). They range from 3 (the worst) to 18 (the best), with an average of 10 for an ordinary adult. Statistics represent core capabilities possessed by all Protagonists. All are important. (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: STATISTICS\b0  on page \lang3081 9\lang1033 .)\par
You can create stats in two ways: rolling them or assigning points. Pick a method.\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b 1.\tab ROLL STATS: \b0 For each stat roll 4D6, drop the lowest of the four dice, and add up the other three. Place the six rolls in whichever stats you like.\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\b 2.\tab ASSIGN STATS: \b0 Divide 72 points among the six stats however you like, or pick one of the sets from page \lang3081 10\lang1033  and assign each score to one statistic.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 After the basic values are assigned for each statistic, modify according to the Harshness Descriptor for the setting:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 For Protagonists in \b Harsh\b0  settings: add 1 to \i either\i0  STR \i or\i0  CON (player\rquote s choice)\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 For Protagonists in \b Very Harsh\b0  settings: add 1 to \i both\i0  STR \i and\i0  CON\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.3\tab STEP 2: Calculate Derived Attributes\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Hit Points, Willpower Points, Sanity Points, and Breaking Point are derived from stats. They represent physical and mental resilience. When your Protagonist is hurt, exercises mental fortitude, or is traumatized, those scores can drop. If your Protagonist has a STR score that is outside the average range (9\emdash 12) he or she also has a modifier to the damage inflicted from hand-to-hand combat. (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: DERIVED ATTRIBUTES & DAMAGE BONUS\b0  on page \lang3081 11\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.4\tab STEP 3: Select Archetype\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 What does your Protagonist do for a living (or just to stay alive)? Archetype dictates what skills your Protagonist has, his or her basic resource level, and the number of Bonds he or she possesses. (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: ARCHETYPES\b0  on page \lang3081 12\lang1033 .) \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.5\tab STEP 4: Calculate Resources Rating\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 The Resources rating is a number between 0 and 20 that reflects the Protagonist\rquote s access to valuable or useful equipment. A Protagonist\rquote s base Resources rating is dictated by his or her Archetype, however during later steps, you can sacrifice other potential bonus skills in favor of a higher resources score; conversely, you can agree to drop Resources rating of 0 (entirely without access to resources) and receive additional skills. (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: RESOURCES\b0  on page \lang3081 22\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.6\tab STEP 5: Define Bonds\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Bonds indicate the strength of relationships with the most important people and communities in your Protagonist\rquote s life \emdash  like a spouse, child, a long-time travelling companion, or a local community of people. Bonds help Protagonists resist mental trauma\emdash but as your Protagonist\rquote s life falls apart under the stress of the Mythos-haunted world, Bonds deteriorate. \par
There are \b two types of Bonds\b0  \endash  bonds with individuals and bonds with an entire community. The latter reflect the Protagonist\rquote s standing as part of the community and his or her ability to influence the group. \par
Each Individual Bond has a value that starts equal to your Protagonist\rquote s Charisma (CHA). \par
\pard Each Community Bond has a default value equal to half the Protagonist\rquote s Resources rating, however during creation of the Protagonist the player may elect to sacrifice potential skills in favor of a higher value. Conversely, the player may elect to take a Community Bond with a value of 1 (lowest possible social standing) and receive additional skills. (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: BONDS\b0  on page \lang3081 26\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.7\tab STEP 6: Select Bonus & Adversity Skills\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Skills require special training, and come from schooling, experience, or personal interest. Skills are measured from 0% (no training) to 99% (foremost expert in the world). (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: SKILLS\b0  on page \lang3081 31\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.8\tab STEP 7: Determine Mental Damage from Harsh Environments\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Protagonists that have grown up in difficult and brutal conditions are likely to have picked up some mental scarring along the way. This can leave them hardened to certain types of traumatic stimuli, distant from those around them, or afflicted with mental disorders. (see \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: MENTAL DAMAGE FROM HARSH UPBRINGING\b0 , page \lang3081 40\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.2.9\tab STEP 8: Add the Final Details\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Start filling in the details that make your Protagonist interesting.\par
How old is your Protagonist? What does he or she look like? Where did he or she grow up?\par
What\rquote s your Protagonist\rquote s name? What is your Protagonist\rquote s role in the community and what\rquote s your personal life like?\par
And why, despite all the terrifying dangers, does your Protagonist venture out to pursue adventure or investigate weirdness?\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs32 >> How To Create A Protagonist\fs38\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs32 Determine Harshness of Protagonist\rquote s Upbringing\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\fs22\'b7\tab\f1 Ask Game Moderator for the setting\rquote s Harshness Descriptor \endash  Normal(ish), Harsh, Very Harsh.\par
\pard\intbl\fs32 Stats & Derived Attributes\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\fs22\'b7\tab\f1 Roll \b STATISTIC \b0 scores (see page \lang3081 6\lang1033 ) or divide 72 points between the six stats. See page \lang3081 10\lang1033  for suggested sets.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Modify STR and/or CON statistic scores based on Harshness:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\f1 Harsh \tab\tab add +1 to STR \i or\i0  CON (player\rquote s choice)\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Very Harsh \tab add +1 to STR \i and\i0  CON\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Calculate \b DERIVED ATTRIBUTES\b0  (see page \lang3081 11\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\b\f1 HP\b0  = (STR + CON) \'f7 2, rounded up.\par
\f5 o\tab\b\f1 WP\b0  = POW.\par
\f5 o\tab\b\f1 Recovery SAN\b0  is always POW \'d7 5, regardless of setting harshness.\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Determine Starting \b SAN\b0  based on Harshness Descriptor:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li2160\f6\'a7\tab\f1 Normal(ish)\b  \tab\tab SAN \b0 = POW \'d7 5.\par
\f6\'a7\tab\f1 Harsh or Very Harsh\tab\b SAN \b0 = POW \'d7 4.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\b\f1 BP\b0  = SAN \u8722? POW.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 High and low stat scores can tell something about your Protagonist\rquote s physical description. (See \b DISTINGUISHING FEATURES\b0  on page \lang3081 10\lang1033 .)\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If STR is below 9 or above 12, look up \b DAMAGE BONUS\b0  (see page \lang3081 52\lang1033 ).\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs32 Archetype, Skills, Resources & Bonds\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\fs22\'b7\tab\f1 Choose an \b ARCHETYPE\b0  from the lists starting on page \lang3081 13\lang1033 .\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Write down the \b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS\b0  for your Protagonist\rquote s Archetype and record the starting RESOURCES rating associated with the Archetype.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Your Protagonist may get \b\caps Adversity Skill Points\b0\caps0  (see page \lang3081 21\lang1033 ) which can be used to increase one of the four setting-specific skills defined as adversity skills. Each pick provides +20 rating to the chosen skill.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\f1 Harsh\tab\tab\tab 1 pick\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Very Harsh\tab\tab 2 picks\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 On a piece of scrap paper, record the Protagonist\rquote s number of available BONUS SKILL POINT picks (see below). This starts at 10.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 (Optional) \b0 Modify your Protagonist\rquote s \b RESOURCES\b0  rating (see page \lang3081 22\lang1033 ):\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\f1 Increase rating by sacrificing one or more BONUS SKILL POINT picks; the first sacrifice gives +5 to RESOURCES rating, each subsequent sacrifice gives +2. \par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Alternatively, choose to reset rating to 0 and receive one extra BONUS SKILL POINT pick.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Once the final RESOURCES rating has been established, look up the breakdown (see page \lang3081 22\lang1033 ) of \ldblquote at-hand\rdblquote /stowed/stored points and number of Resource checkmarks and copy these to Protagonist sheet\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Define your Protagonist\rquote s \b BONDS\b0  (see page \lang3081 26\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\f1 The Protagonist\rquote s Archetype determines how many Bonds he or she has.\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Each Bond is either a Community Bond or an Individual Bond (player\rquote s choice).\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Each \b Individual Bond\b0  refers to an individual with special significance and begins with a score equal to your Protagonist\rquote s CHA.\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Each \b Community Bond\b0  refers to a community within which the Protagonist has a particular standing and begins with a value equal to \ul half\ulnone  his or her RESOURCES rating (see above).\par
\f5 o\tab\b\f1 (Optional)\b0  Modify Community Bond Values:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li2160\f6\'a7\tab\f1 Improve the rating of any Community Bond by sacrificing BONUS SKILL picks; the first sacrifice for any given Bond gives +5 to its value, each subsequent sacrifice for the same Bond gives +2.\par
\f6\'a7\tab\f1 Alternatively, choose to take a rating of 1 for a Community Bond (reflecting the lowest possible standing in the society) and receive one extra BONUS SKILL POINT pick.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 After resolving any optional spends of \b BONUS SKILL POINTS\b0  (page \lang3081 30\lang1033 ) for non-skill benefits, use the remainder to improve ANY skills (except Unnatural). Each pick provides an increase of 20 points.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\f1 No skill can start higher than 80%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs38 Mental Damage from Harsh Environment\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\fs22\'b7\tab\f1 If Setting Harshness is anything other than \ldblquote Normal(ish)\rdblquote , determine any \b MENTAL DAMAGE FROM ENVIRONMENT\b0  (see page \lang3081 40\lang1033 ). This may mean:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li1440\f5 o\tab\f1 Protagonist begins play with \b MENTAL DISORDERS\b0 .\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Protagonist loses points from Bonds due to emotional distance.\par
\f5 o\tab\f1 Protagonist begins play \b ADAPTED\b0  to Violence or Helplessness.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs38 Final Details\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\fs22\'b7\tab\f1 Choose \b NAME\b0 , \b AGE\b0 , \b SEX\b0 , \b BIRTHPLACE\b0  and Current \b HOME\b0 .\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 As you play, describe up to five \b MOTIVATIONS\b0  that are not Bonds.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 When your Protagonist develops a new \b MENTAL DISORDER\b0 , it replaces a motivation.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.3\tab Detailed Description: Statistics\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Every Protagonist has six core capabilities: Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, Intelligence, Power, and Charisma. These are called his or her statistics (or \ldblquote stats\rdblquote  for short).\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl\b >>Statistics\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl\b0\fs20 Statistic\cell Abbreviation\cell Description\cell Stat Test Examples\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl Strength\cell STR\cell Physical power, size, and musculature.\cell Drag an innocent to safety. Break down a locked door. Hold a struggling victim down.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl Constitution\cell CON\cell Health and physical resilience.\cell Resist illness, exhaustion, or pain. Hold your breath for a long time. Keep running longer than everyone else.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl Dexterity\cell DEX\cell Agility, coordination, and nimbleness.\cell Keep balance. React quickly.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl Intelligence\cell INT\cell How well a Protagonist notices, remembers, and connects things. Along with Archetype, it indicates education and overall brilliance.\cell Recall a detail. Piece together disparate data.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl Power\cell POW\cell Force of personality, motivation, and psychic resilience.\cell Keep your head in a crisis. Stand up to pressure.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1269\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2681\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6411\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl Charisma\cell CHA\cell Charm, leadership, and personal\par
appeal. May indicate physical attractiveness.\cell Make a good impression. Talk your way into a private club. Look like you\par
belong.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs22\par
\pard During Protagonist creation, you can either roll \b STATISTIC \b0 scores (see page \lang3081 6\lang1033 ) or simply divide 72 points between the six stats however you wish. The table nearby gives some examples of possible assignments.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8647\pard\intbl >> Assignable Set of Statistics\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2944\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4111\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7513\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8647\pard\intbl Description\cell Stat 1\cell Stat 2\cell Stat 3\cell Stat 4\cell Stat 5\cell Stat 6\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2944\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4111\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7513\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8647\pard\intbl Well-Rounded\cell 13\cell 13\cell 12\cell 12\cell 11\cell 11\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2944\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4111\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7513\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8647\pard\intbl Focused\cell 15\cell 14\cell 12\cell 11\cell 10\cell 10\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2944\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4111\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7513\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8647\pard\intbl Highly Focused\cell 17\cell 14\cell 12\cell 10\cell 10\cell 9\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
Each stat has a test score equal to the stat \'d7 5: STR\'d75, INT\'d75, POW\'d75, etc. This means roll five times the stat or less on percentile dice (1D100) to succeed. When your Protagonist attempts a difficult action and no skill covers it, the Game Moderator may ask you to roll a stat test for whatever stat is the closest fit.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.3.1\tab Stat Adjustments for Harsh Upbringings\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Protagonists who have managed to reach adulthood in a dangerous or deadly environment are likely to be hardier or stronger than average\endash  weaker individuals simply don\rquote t make it through such horrible upbringings. To reflect this, such Protagonists receive a bonus to STR and/or CON as follows:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Normal(ish)\b0  setting: no bonus\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Harsh\b0  setting: +1 to either STR \i or\i0  CON (pick one)\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Very Harsh\b0  setting: +1 to both STR \i and\i0  CON\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb120\sa200\cf2\b\f0 What Makes An Upbringing Harsh?\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 In Medieval settings, most people live a wretched life. To reflect this, the default Harshness indicator for a Protagonist\rquote s upbringing is \b Harsh\b0 . That means that characters typically begin with a +1 boost to either STR or CON (the fact that they have made it to adulthood makes them among the healthier representatives of their communities) and some bonus skill picks; however any character whose CHA or POW is below 7 will have suffered some isolation as described in \b MENTAL DAMAGE FROM HARSH UPBRINGINGS\b0 , page \lang3081 40\lang1033 .\par
Protagonists who were born into privilege \endash  sons and daughters of nobility or similar \endash  may have avoided the squalor of everyday life. Such (rare) characters can be considered to come from a \b Normal(-ish)\b0  upbringing, gaining neither the bonus to STR/CON nor suffering the potential mental costs of a harsh upbringing.\par
While the \i default\i0  throughout the 800 years covered by this SRD is for Harsh environments, that is not to say that there weren\rquote t isolated times and places where life was even worse \endash  warranting a \b Very Harsh\b0  indicator. The Anarchy in England; the Great Famine across Europe; the Crusades across Europe and into the Mediterranean; the Black Death; the Magyar and Mongol invasions from the Steppes; Jewish massacres, expulsions, and rising antisemitism are all examples of times and places where the Game Master might want to rate a Protagonist\rquote s upbringing as Very Harsh. \cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 2.3.2\tab Distinguishing Features\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A stat below 9 or above 12 is exceptional. Spare a word or two to describe stats outside the average; see the table nearby for some examples. These descriptors help give your Protagonist personality.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl >> Sample Distinguishing Features\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl Statistic\cell 3\emdash 4\cell 5\emdash 8\cell 9\emdash 12\cell 13\emdash 16\cell 17\emdash 18\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs20 Strength\cell\fs22 Feeble\cell Weak\cell (Average)\cell Muscular\cell Huge\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs20 Dexterity\cell\fs22 Barely Mobile\cell Clumsy\cell (Average)\cell Nimble\cell Acrobatic\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs20 Constitution\cell\fs22 Bedridden\cell Sickly\cell (Average)\cell Perfect Health\cell Indefatigable\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs20 Intelligence\cell\fs22 Imbecilic\cell Slow\cell (Average)\cell Perceptive\cell Brilliant\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs20 Power\cell\fs22 Spineless\cell Nervous\cell (Average)\cell Strong-Willed\cell Indomitable\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1672\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3452\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5232\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7012\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8793\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\fs20 Charisma\cell\fs22 Unbearable\cell Awkward\cell (Average)\cell Charming\cell Magnetic\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.4\tab Detailed Description: Derived Attributes & Damage Bonus\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The derived attributes \emdash  Hit Points, Willpower Points, Sanity Points, and Breaking Point \emdash  represent your Protagonist\rquote s physical and mental toughness. \par
Damage Bonus reflects whether his or her brawn (or lack thereof) will affect damage inflicted through brawling and hand-to-hand weapons.\par
\b HIT POINTS (HP):\b0  Hit Points represent how much damage your Protagonist can sustain. When the Protagonist is injured, subtract the damage from HP. At 2 HP, your Protagonist falls unconscious. At 0 HP, your Protagonist dies. Hit Points are regained through rest and medical attention.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\i Hit Points equal CON plus STR, divided by two and rounded up.\par
\pard\i0 WILLPOWER POINTS (WP):\b0  Willpower Points represent mental fortitude. They fall when your Protagonist attempts to suppress the symptoms of mental illness (see \b RESISTING INSANITY\b0  on page \lang3081 77\lang1033 ), becomes exhausted (see \b EXHAUSTION\b0  on page \lang3081 47\lang1033 ), attempts to resist persuasion, suffers emotional burnout (see \b FUMBLE\b0  on page \lang3081 43\lang1033 ), or tries to fuel unnatural phenomena. At 2 WP, your Protagonist has a temporary emotional collapse. At 0 WP, your Protagonist falls unconscious. Willpower Points are regained with rest. (See \b WILLPOWER POINTS\b0  on page \lang3081 46\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\i Willpower Points equal POW.\par
\pard\i0 SANITY POINTS (SAN):\b0  Sanity Points represent mental health: how much mental trauma, or exposure to the unnatural your Protagonist can endure before going insane. In moments of mental trauma your Protagonist must make a \b Sanity test\b0  by rolling SAN or lower on 1D100. If that fails, your Protagonist loses SAN. (See \b SANITY\b0  on page \lang3081 68\lang1033 .) Sanity Points are regained through remedial care or by overcoming unnatural threats. At 0 Sanity Points, your Protagonist goes irretrievably insane and becomes an NPC permanently under the control of the Game Moderator.\par
A Protagonist\rquote s starting Sanity Points depends on the Harshness of his or her upbringing \endash  the harsher the situation, the more brutality and horror the Protagonist has been scarred by.   \par
\pard\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\i Normal(ish) Setting: Sanity Points begin equal to POW\'d75.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc Harsh or Very Harsh Setting: Sanity Points begin equal to POW\'d74.\par
\pard\i0 BREAKING POINT:\b0  The Breaking Point is the point at which loss of SAN triggers a long-term mental disorder. (See \b INSANITY AND DISORDERS\b0  on page \lang3081 72\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\i A Protagonist\rquote s Breaking Point equals SAN minus POW.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\i0 The instant the Protagonist\rquote s SAN reaches the Breaking Point, he or she gains a disorder. Reset the Breaking Point to equal the new SAN score minus POW.\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1\b MAXIMUM SAN: \b0 The is the absolute maximum number of Sanity Points your Protagonist can EVER reach, by any means. Learning more about the true nature of the Cthulhu Mythos (represented by the Unnatural skill) reduces this number.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\b\i A Protagonist\rquote s Maximum SAN always equals 99 minus skill rating in the Unnatural Skill.\par
\pard\i0 RECOVERY SAN:\b0  This is the highest Sanity Point total that your Protagonist can possibly achieve through mundane methods \endash  relaxation, personal pursuits, caring for loved ones, and seeking help for mental illness. See \b RECOVERING SANITY\b0  on page \lang3081 78\lang1033 .\par
\pard\qc\b A Protagonist\rquote s Recovery SAN equals POW\'d75, regardless of the harshness of the setting.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qc\i If this number would be higher than Max SAN, Recovery SAN equals Max SAN.\par
\pard\i0 DAMAGE BONUS:\b0  High or low Strength modifies the \b DAMAGE\b0  the Protagonist inflicts through successful unarmed and hand-to-hand weapon attacks (see page \lang3081 52\lang1033 ). This modifier to damage should be recorded on the Protagonist sheet for later reference.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl >> Damage Bonus from STR Score\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2028\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4164\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6300\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8437\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl 1\emdash 4\cell 5\emdash 8\cell 9\emdash 12\cell 13\emdash 16\cell 17\emdash 18\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2028\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4164\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6300\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8437\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl -2\cell -1\cell 0\cell +1\cell +2\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.5\tab Detailed Description: Archetypes\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Each Protagonist is a representative of a broad category of character types, usually related to the job he or she performs in the game world. Each such category is called an \b Archetype\b0 . \par
An Archetype says a lot about a Protagonist. It grants a \ldblquote kit\rdblquote  of appropriate skills. It also determines the number of Bonds your Protagonist has when the game begins, and his or her starting Resource level.\par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  Some Archetypes require people who are particularly fit, stable, or smart. This means the recommended stats should be 10 or higher \emdash  or at least they were when your Protagonist first started out being the Archetype. \par
\pard\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\b0  Each Archetype has a predefined kit of skills with scores that replace the default skill ratings. This represents the baseline training, experience, and education for that Archetype. See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: SKILLS\b0  on page \lang3081 31\lang1033  for their uses.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b RESOURCES:\b0  Each Archetype dictates a base value for the Resources rating. \par
\b BONDS\b0 : Each Archetype dictates the number of Bonds your Protagonist begins with. Difficult and trying Archetypes mean fewer Bonds but more skills. The player can decide whether each of these Bonds refers to:\par
\pard\fi-360\li765\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 a relationship to an individual (Individual Bonds) or \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 standing within a community (Community Bonds).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.5.1\tab Customizing Your Protagonist With Other Skills\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Don\rquote t worry if your Protagonist at this point looks like a generic representative of his or her chosen Archetype. While the Archetype defines a core set of abilities, those skills and ratings don\rquote t represent the full range of everything your Protagonist can do. \par
Later in the character generation process you will have opportunities to pick other skills they are also good at. There are two different types of skill picks:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\caps\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Adversity Skill Point Picks\b0\caps0  (see page \lang3081 21\lang1033 ) represent abilities your Protagonist has because of the harsh environment that he or she grew up in. These picks can only be used to enhance a few specific skills, and cannot be traded in for other benefits.\par
\pard\fi-357\li714\caps\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Bonus Skill Point Picks\b0\caps0  (see page \lang3081 30\lang1033 ) represent hobbies and general experience he or she learned above and beyond the basics associated with the Archetype. You start with \ul ten\ulnone  such bonus picks to use later in the Protagonist generation process. These picks \i can\i0  be traded in for other advantages like increased availability of resources-at-hand or standing in a community.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl >> A Note on Literacy and Illiteracy\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10348\pard\intbl\sb120\sa120\sl276\slmult1 In Medieval settings, not every adult can read and write. The limited (or non-existent) education opportunities available to most individuals means that only a relatively small percentage of people are literate. Such skills are usually limited to professions which routinely involving reading or writing documents. Being illiterate doesn\rquote t mean you can\rquote t communicate verbally \endash  but it does make it difficult or impossible to understand any information encountered in written form.\par
\pard\intbl In game terms, literacy is represented by the Protagonist\rquote s rating in the Literacy skill (described in the skill listings in Section 2.10.5). By default this skill begins at zero, although some archetypes furnish the Protagonist with a higher starting score. If you want your Protagonist to be able to read and write you should reserve some bonus skill picks to ensure a Literacy skill rating of 40% or more.\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.5.2\tab List of Archetypes\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The following Archetypes are appropriate for games of Lovecraftian investigation set in Medieval eras. Archetypes represent the roles that player characters fulfill in society. An archetype could represent the life a player character had before they were drawn into investigating cosmic horror. Or it could represent the role they still try to maintain to the best of their ability while the horrors slowly erode everything they thought they understood. \par
Each archetype has a collection of skills that represent knowledge areas the player character uses in their daily lives. \par
\pard This list doesn\rquote t cover every possible character type but focus on likely protagonists in mystery and investigation tales. The GM is encouraged to develop other archetypes to cover other character types suggested by players. Guidelines for developing new Archetypes may be found on page \lang3081 94\lang1033 .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang3081\b Artisan / Craftsperson\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 As artisans and craftspeople, you are the makers of the Medieval age. Crafting everything from sculptures and gargoyles to wooden bowls and utensils, you carve out a niche for yourself in medieval society, gradually creating a professional stratum in society.\par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  DEX\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Appraise 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Art or Craft (Type) 80%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Art or Craft (Type) 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Athletics 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Scavenge 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 60%\par
\pard\sa60\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Carouse 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Dodge 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Literacy 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Repair/Devise 40%\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 60%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  4\par
\b BONDS:\b0  3\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 Bandit/Criminal\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A life of crime is usually a life that\rquote s thrust upon people, not one that they choose. Due to unforeseen circumstances, whether that be warfare sweeping through the land, political power plays leaving a once wealthy family dispossessed, or just the vagaries of fate, you find yourself operating outside the bounds of civilized society.\par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  DEX, CHA\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Appraise 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Forage/Hunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Stealth 60%\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Unarmed Combat 60%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Art or Craft (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Athletics 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Beguile 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Carouse 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Disguise 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Melee Weapons 70%\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Repair/Devise 40%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  3\par
\b BONDS:\b0  5\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Cleric\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 You\rquote re a keeper of knowledge. There\rquote s a good chance you\rquote re literate, having studied at a church, monastery, or university. Odds are you\rquote re affiliated with the church, but there can be secular clerics who serve at courts.\par
\pard\b RECOMMENDED STAT:\b0  INT\par
\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 30%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Literacy 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Procuratio 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Reassure 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Type) 70%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 1 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Latin) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 History 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Another) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Occult (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Quadrivium 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Trivium 40%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  5\par
\b BONDS:\b0  4 (including one Community Bond with a starting score of 12)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Farmer\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 You tend to you lands or herds. It\rquote s unlikely you own the land or the produce, both belonging to your lord. While it seems you have limited options, you do have a freedom of movement and cache among the rural underclasses. Those same rural people would do their best to ignore social betters who come asking questions. \par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  DEX, STR\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Animal Handling 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Craft (Farming) 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Drive 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Repair/Devise 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ride 50%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Art (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Athletics 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Carouse 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Craft (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Melee Weapons 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Navigate 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ranged Weapons 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 60%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  4\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b BONDS:\b0  4\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Feudal Ruler / Noble\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 One who rules. Depending on the specific location and time period, you could have a hereditary title or a position supported by a group of strong warriors who serve as long as the gifts you give are good. In no era or location does lordship equate to wealth. \par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  DEX, STR\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Forage/Hunt 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Local) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Literacy 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Melee Weapons 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Procuratio 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ride 60%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 1 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Animal Handling 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Carouse 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Dodge 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ranged Weapons 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Siege Weapons 40%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  5\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b BONDS: 3 \b0 (including one Community Bond with a starting score of 12)\b\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2 Guard / Soldier\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 Towns, merchants, and lords all have use for people who know which way to point a spear. In the early centuries of the Medieval era you were paid in loot from successful battles. Later in the period you earn room and board as well as equipment. Perhaps even a small wage if you\rquote re lucky. \par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  STR, DEX\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Athletics 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Beguile 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Carouse 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Melee Weapons 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Unarmed Combat 70%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 4 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Appraise 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Dodge 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Forage/Hunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Navigate 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ranged Weapons 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Repair/Devise 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Scavenge 50%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  4\par
\b BONDS:\b0  3\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Healer\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 You have at least a knowledge of herbs, simples, and unguents. It\rquote s possible you were trained by a university physician or during latter part of the age even studied at one yourself. People come to you for all their ailments, from stomach upset to baldness, impotence to an imbalance of humors. \par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  INT\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alchemy 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Chirurgury 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Forage/Hunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 50%\par
\pard\sa60\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 3 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Appraise 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Beguile 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Procuratio 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Reassure 50%\par
\pard\fi-357\li714\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Scavenge 50%\par
\pard\sa60\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  5\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b BONDS:\b0  2\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Hunter / Game Keeper\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 You know the forest like the back of your hand. You know the Forest Laws almost as well. If you\rquote re a game keeper, your lord provides you basic living conditions in exchange for your services. A hunter might serve their local community or even offer up their skills to be a poacher.\par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  DEX, STR\par
\pard\sa60\sl276\slmult1\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Craft (Farming) 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Forage/Hunt 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ranged Weapons 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ride 50%\par
\pard\sa60\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 1 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Animal Handling 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Athletics 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Carouse 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Craft (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Dodge 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Melee Weapons 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Navigate 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Procuratio 40%\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 60%\par
\pard\sa60\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  4\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b BONDS:\b0  4\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Merchant\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 You make your living buying and selling goods. Maybe its produce from local farms that you cart to market towns on behalf of farmers, with a reasonable percentage of the sale, or course. Or maybe you travel the continent bringing goods from afar to local markets. In the later period, you might even have a shop in a city. \par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  INT\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Appraise 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Art or Craft (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Beguile 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 30%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Literacy 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 60%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 2 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Drive 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 History 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ride 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 60%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  5\par
\b BONDS:\b0  3\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Monk / Nun\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 You\rquote ve chosen a life of solitude and religious contemplation. Or, more likely, had it chosen for you. You\rquote ve learned useful skills such as literacy, basic medicine, and hospitality. Unless your monastery is truly remote, it serves as a hospital and waystation for travelers and nearby residents.\par
\pard\b RECOMMENDED STAT:\b0  INT\par
\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Latin) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 30%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Literacy 70%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Procuratio 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Type) 70%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 2 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alchemy 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ciphers 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 History 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Type)\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Occult (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Quadrivium 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Trivium 40%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  2\par
\b BONDS:\b0  4 (including one Community Bond with a starting score of 12)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Outcast / Hermit\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 Whether by choice or the inimitable crush of economic and military battles, you live outside the boundaries of civilized society. In some cultures you\rquote re shunned. In others you\rquote re viewed as a holy fool or wise person to be sought out for important, but tough to decipher advice.\par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  CON\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Dodge 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Forage/Hunt 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Insight 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Scavenge 70%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 4 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Appraise 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Animal Handling 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Beguile 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 First Aid 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Harangue/Taunt 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 History 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Persuade 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ranged Weapons 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Stealth 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Unarmed Combat 80%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  2\par
\b BONDS:\b0  3\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b Scholar\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0 Perhaps you\rquote re a translator serving a lord by translating documents and conversations, or you\rquote re affiliated with the Bayt al-Hikma in Baghdad, or one of the universities that are beginning to appear around the year 1000 and continue to profligate across the continent. You value learning, discourse, and possibly even experimentation. \par
\b RECOMMENDED STATS:\b0  INT\par
\b ARCHETYPAL SKILLS:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Homeland 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Literacy 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Procuratio 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Quadrivium 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Trivium 60%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Choose any 2 of these that you don't already have:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alchemy 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Alertness 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Folklore 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Foreign Language (Type) 40%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Herb Lore 60%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 History 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Occult (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Religion (Type) 50%\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Search 60%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b STARTING RESOURCES:\b0  5\par
\b BONDS:\b0  3\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0\fs26 2.6\tab Detailed Description: Adversity Skill Points\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Depending on the harshness of the environment where your Protagonist grew up, he or she may gain \b Adversity Skill Point Picks\b0 . Each such pick provides a 20-point increase in rating for one skill from a pre-defined list. \par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 The number of Adversity Skill Point Picks your Protagonist receives depends on the Harshness Descriptor relevant to their particular upbringing:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Normal(ish)\b0  upbringing: no Adversity Skill Point Picks\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Harsh\b0  upbringing: 1 Adversity Skill Point Pick\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Very Harsh\b0  upbringing: 2 Adversity Skill Point Picks\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 Adversity Skill Point Picks can \i ONLY\i0  be spent to increase ratings in the following list of setting-specific adversity skills: \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081 Carouse, First Aid, Foreign Court/Kingdom (type),  Scavenge\lang1033 .\par
You can pick the same skill more than once.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.7\tab Detailed Description: Resources\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Every Protagonist has a Resources rating between 0 and 20. This number is an abstraction that represents the size, value, and utility of the \b personal pool of resources\b0  to which he or she has ready access. A Protagonist who is \ldblquote wealthy\rdblquote  in a material sense will have a high Resources rating, since they have personal ownership \endash  and hence access \endash  to more things. Conversely, someone who is destitute and forced to carry their meagre belongings on their back will probably have a very low Resources rating. The definition of what constitutes \ldblquote wealth\rdblquote  and \ldblquote valuable resources\rdblquote  might vary depending on the game setting, but the Resources rating is a handy abstract rating which compares the magnitude of the Protagonist\rquote s material possessions against other people\rquote s. \par
The Resources rating represents a pool of previously unspecified items \i in addition to\i0  any named pieces of equipment that appears on the Protagonist\rquote s character sheet.\par
There are two ways in which Resources ratings can become important during a game of \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 :\par
\pard\fi-357\li714\sa200\sl276\slmult1 1.\tab The rating can be used as a measure of status and wealth which dictates how Non-Player Characters react to the Protagonists; a Protagonist who has a sizeable cache of resources might find NPCs more willing to listen to what he or she has to say \'85 or alternatively more likely to want to take some of those resources away.\par
2.\tab Game encounters may involve challenges which can be overcome through possession of particular \endash  possibly obscure \endash  items or resources; a Protagonist who fossicks through his or her trove of (unnamed) personal items may locate just the thing that is needed. Usually this requires a successful \b Resources test\b0  (a 1D100 roll against \b Resources\b0  \b\'d7\b0  \b 5\b0 ). \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 A Protagonist\rquote s Resources rating may change during play as especially significant items are pulled from the \ldblquote bag of tricks\rdblquote , items are destroyed, or new equipment caches are picked over for useful additions.\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.1\tab Determining the Starting Resources rating\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist\rquote s Archetype determines the starting value for his or her Resources rating; it is a number listed as part of the Archetype description.\par
\pard If you would prefer this value to be higher, you have the option to \ldblquote trade-in\rdblquote  one or more \b BONUS SKILL POINT\b0  picks (see page \lang3081 30\lang1033 ). For the first such skill pick traded-in, your Protagonist receives a +5 boost to Resources rating. Each additional pick you trade in beyond the first, grants your Protagonist a further +2 boost to Resources. You may sacrifice as many skill picks as you wish, although each will reduce your opportunities to round-out your Protagonist with extra skills during a later step of Protagonist creation.\par
Alternatively, if you would prefer to play a Protagonist who is entirely bereft of resources (i.e., has a Resources rating of 0), you can choose to do so and in return receive one extra Bonus Skill Point Pick for later use.\par
\b Rating\tab\tab What the Rating Represents\par
\b0 0 \tab\tab No ownership of any item of value or function. Penury. Near starvation.\par
1-4\tab\tab Owns only basic and valueless items; barely enough to eke out a basic life. Always hungry.\par
5-8\tab\tab Owns a sparse collection of valuable or useful items, some in terrible condition. Sometimes hungry.\par
9-12\tab\tab Owns a modest cache of valuable, useful items. Usually has basic food.\par
\pard\fi-1440\li1440 13-16\tab Owns a fair stock of low-grade valuable items. Occasional access to superior food.\par
17-18\tab Owns an impressive collection of useful gear; considered wealthy / well-resourced. Regular access to superior food\par
19\tab The envy of most people; owns numerous sought-after items of impressive function. Access to the best food and beverages.\par
\pard\fi-1440\li1440\sa200\sl276\slmult1 20+\tab Access to unparalleled quantities of valuable or useful items. A stockpile of wealth. Choice of any available food, in any quantity.\par
\pard If you need to know how your Resources Rating translates to financial wealth, consult the table in the \b BUYING EQUIPMENT\b0  section (page \lang3081 64\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.2\tab Permanent Resources, Resources At-Hand, and Resource Checks\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The full value established above is called the Protagonist\rquote s \b Permanent Resources\b0  rating, since it measures the sum total of everything he or she owns \endash  regardless of where it is kept. \par
Carrying around a lot of bulky equipment everywhere is usually not practical, so Protagonists with significant Resources ratings (7+ points) will usually need to \b stow\b0  some of their junk in a vehicle or on a pack animal. Those with even more resources will need to \b store \b0 the overflow in a fixed \lquote home base\rquote  location. \par
The table nearby shows a breakdown of \lquote at hand\rquote  vs \lquote stowed\rquote  vs \lquote in storage\rquote  Resource rating points. There is space on the Protagonist sheet to record this breakdown of the total Permanent Resource rating into the three categories. The three numbers (\lquote at-hand\rquote , \lquote stowed\rquote , and \lquote in storage\rquote ) must always add up to the Permanent Resources rating. \par
The Permanent Resources rating measures both the quantity of items your Protagonist has dedicated access to, and their usefulness. This in turn governs \i how many times\i0  per adventure the Protagonist can successfully pull out useful items before the pool is temporarily exhausted. \par
In game terms this is represented by the number of \b Resource Check boxes\b0  the Protagonist has available \endash  these are explained further below. The number of check boxes available to your Protagonist is also indicated on the table nearby: record it on the Protagonist Sheet by blacking out but those boxes available to the Protagonist (e.g., for a Protagonist with only one checkbox available, fill in all but one of the available boxes with solid black \endash  use pencil since your Protagonist may open up more boxes later).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 Resources Breakdown & Check Boxes\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 Permanent Resource Rating\cell\ldblquote At Hand\rdblquote  / \ldblquote Stowed\rdblquote  / \ldblquote In Storage\rdblquote\cell Check Boxes\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 0\cell 0 / 0 / 0\cell 0\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 1\cell 1 / 0 / 0\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 2\cell 2 / 0 / 0\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 3\cell 3 / 0 / 0\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 4\cell 4 / 0 / 0\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 5\cell 5 / 0 / 0\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 6\cell 6 / 0 / 0\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 7\cell 6 / 1 / 0\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 8\cell 6 / 2 / 0\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 9\cell 6 / 3 / 0\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 10\cell 6 / 4 / 0\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 11\cell 6 / 5 / 0\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 12\cell 6 / 6 / 0\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 13\cell 6 / 6 / 1\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 14\cell 6 / 6 / 2\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 15\cell 6 / 6 / 3\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 16\cell 6 / 6 / 4\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 17\cell 6 / 6 / 5\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 18\cell 6 / 6 / 6\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 19\cell 6 / 6 / 7\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1588\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3998\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4849\pard\intbl 20+\cell 6 / 6 / 8+\cell 3\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Pushing the Limits\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 As indicated in the table, it is typically only possible for your Protagonist to keep 6 points of Resources on their person (\lquote at-hand\rquote ) and another 6 points \lquote stowed\rquote  in a handy vehicle or on a handy animal. These aren\rquote t hard and fast limits, but represent what can comfortably be carried/transported without impacting travel speed and convenience. If situations arise where the Protagonist really needs to carry more (e.g., carry the entire 10 points of Permanent Resources by hand while fleeing a burning building), it is up to the Game Moderator to decide what is possible and what impacts might arise from your Protagonist or vehicle being \lquote overloaded\rquote . The Game Moderator might rule this has an impact on the rate of travel, or require some kind of skill test to keep moving forward under excess load. \par
Generally, stretching the limits beyond 12 points carried \lquote at hand\rquote  or 12 points \lquote stowed\rquote  is impossible.\par
There is no limit to the amount of Resources rating points that can be \lquote in storage\rquote  at a fixed location (e.g., a home base or workshop).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Which Rating for a Test?\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 Any time your Protagonist\rquote s Resources rating is the subject of a test, the effective rating number that is used should reflect the situation. It should be determined by the amount of Resources available to your Protagonist at that moment. If he or she is at home base, that will probably be the full Permanent Resources amount; if your Protagonist is close to his or her vehicle (or pack animal) that might be the \lquote at-hand\rquote  value PLUS the stowed value. If your Protagonist is far away from both home base and vehicle/animal, the number is likely to be just the \lquote at-hand\rquote  number.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Which Rating for NPC Reactions?\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 When using Resources as a means of determining Non-Player Character reactions, the rating that is used also depends on the situation. Does the NPC in question know all about your Protagonist\rquote s reputation as a \lquote wealthy\rquote  sort? If so, maybe the full Permanent Resources score can be used even if only some of that wealth is currently on display. Alternatively, if the NPC is suspicious of your Protagonist, it might be hard to get him or her to believe in the existence of any resources beyond what they can see for themselves.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.3\tab The Bag of Tricks\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The higher your Protagonist\rquote s effective Resources rating, the higher the likelihood that his or her accessible personal cache of items may contain something helpful to a situation or problem.\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 In situations where \b non-specialist resources or items\b0  are needed, simply make a test of your Protagonist\rquote s Resources \'d7 5. Success means that something helpful was found. \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 In cases where a situation requires a \b very specialized\b0  resource or item, the Game Moderator might rule it is too rare to find in your Protagonist\rquote s pool of gear. Alternatively, the GM \i may\i0  still permit a test of Resources \'d7 5 roll to locate the rare equipment \endash  \ul\i but\ulnone\i0  rule that success will \b permanently reduce\b0  your Protagonist\rquote s Resources rating by a few points (the number being at the Game Moderator\rquote s discretion).\par
\pard Depending on the specific game setting, the difficulty of Resources tests and the quality of the items unearthed through successful rolls may vary. See \b SCROUNGING EQUIPMENT\b0  starting page \lang3081 64\lang1033 .\par
Rules of Thumb:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Tests to find items or resource types that are considered \i Hard to Get\i0  in the setting are made at HALF the Protagonist\rquote s effective Resources rating\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Tests to find items or resource types that are considered \i Very Hard to Get\i0  or \i Impossible to Get\i0  in the setting are made at QUARTER the Protagonist\rquote s effective Resources rating\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 A test that is a standard success, but which is only just under the target number might yield a sub-standard version of the item or resource. A critical success will always yield the best possible quality available.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.4\tab Checkboxes and Per-Adventure Limits\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 While your Protagonist\rquote s personal Resources can prove helpful during an adventure, there are practical limits to the number of times that items can be pulled from it during a single adventure. \par
\pard After each Resources test resulting in success, place a check mark in one of the Resource Check boxes on the Protagonist\rquote s character sheet. When all the boxes are full, the Protagonist\rquote s resources pool is temporarily exhausted and can\rquote t contribute anything more until he or she has some downtime to replenish or reorganize it (see\lang3081  \lang1033\b\caps Replenishing Resources, Removing Checkmarks\b0\caps0 , page \lang3081 26\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.5\tab Pooling Resources\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Sometimes, it may be appropriate for two or more Protagonists to pool their personal caches of items to improve the likelihood of finding a rare but crucial component. Any Protagonist can contribute items to the pool, as long as he or she hasn\rquote t temporarily exhausted their resource pool (by filling all check boxes).\par
When making a roll to search such a \b combined\b0  resource pool, the effective Resources rating of the collection is equal to the \b highest\b0  individual Resources rating included in the collection \b plus ONE FIFTH\b0  of the Resources rating of every additional individual stockpile added to the heap (round fractions up). This reflects duplication of items or functions.\par
Success on a combined test causes a check mark to be placed on the sheet of the Protagonist whose FULL Resources rating was used. Others who contributed a smaller amount to the total do not receive a check mark.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.6\tab Losing Resources\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A Protagonist\rquote s Resources rating may decrease due to events that occur during play:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 As described above, producing a highly specialized item as the result of a Resources test may cause the Permanent Resources rating to be reduced by one or more.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If the Protagonist is robbed or otherwise loses control of a significant amount of his or her personal equipment, the Game Moderator may decide this warrants a loss of a proportional amount of Resources rating.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If a proportion of the Protagonist\rquote s resources are stowed in a vehicle or on a pack animal, the theft or destruction of the conveyance is likely to cause some or all to be lost, the exact proportion decided by the Game Moderator.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If a proportion of the Protagonist\rquote s resources are stored in a fixed location, a disaster that outright destroys or significantly damages the location will likewise cause a reduction to permanent Resources. The points lost are based on the number of \lquote in storage\rquote  rating points stored at the location (i.e., not carried or stowed). The same loss may occur if the permanent location becomes invaded or overtaken by a hostile party \endash  although in that situation the loss might be temporary, assuming the Protagonists can win back their former stronghold at some future date.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Whenever Resource rating decreases, the player should recalculate the \ldblquote at-hand\rdblquote /stowed/stored breakdown of points as well as the number of check boxes available to the Protagonist. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.7\tab Increasing the Resources Rating During Play\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 During a \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  adventure your Protagonist may gain access to a cache of items ripe for the taking. When this occurs, the Game Moderator will decide the number of Resources rating points each Protagonist might potentially plunder. For a small find this might be modest (1 point or 1D2 points), but for a massive discovery it could be a healthy improvement (1D6 or higher).\par
Increasing your Protagonist\rquote s Permanent Resources rating requires a die roll. With percentile dice, attempt to roll above \b Permanent Resources rating \'d7 5.\b0  This reflects the fact that the more your Protagonist already owns, the harder it is to acquire additional new items he or she does not already have. If the test is successful, increase the Resources rating by the amount or die roll indicated by the GM.\par
Whenever Resource rating increases, the player should recalculate the \ldblquote at-hand\rdblquote /stowed/stored breakdown of points as well as the number of check boxes available to the Protagonist.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.7.8\tab Replenishing Resources, Removing Checkmarks\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 The Game Moderator will determine when your Protagonist group can take the time to replenish or reorganize their Resources pools. Usually this happens between missions, expeditions, or adventures (see \b DOWNTIME\b0 , page \lang3081 80\lang1033 ). Once the Protagonists have invested an appropriate period of downtime all check marks can be erased from the character sheet.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.8\tab Detailed Description: Bonds\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Bonds measure your Protagonist\rquote s relationships with the vital people and societies in his or her life: loved ones, family members, and wider communities. A Bond can protect your Protagonist from SAN loss (see \b PROJECTING ONTO A BOND\b0  on page \lang3081 78\lang1033 ) or offer a chance to repress the effects of a disorder or temporary insanity (see \b REPRESSING INSANITY\b0  on page \lang3081 78\lang1033 ).\par
Bonds are not merely motivations or things your Protagonist likes. They are your Protagonist\rquote s connection to humanity and its social structures. A Protagonist with no Bonds is more susceptible to psychological trauma than one who has people waiting back home.\par
Your Protagonist\rquote s Archetype determines how many Bonds your Protagonist begins with. The more trying and time-consuming the Archetype, the fewer Bonds your Protagonist is able to maintain.\par
There are two distinct types of Bonds, each handled slightly differently \endash  they are \b Individual Bonds\b0  and \b Community Bonds. \b0 When creating a Protagonist, you are free to choose which of his or her starting bonds is of each type.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.8.1\tab Individual Bonds\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An Individual Bond is an emotional connection to a single person. It could be familial or marital, or it could just be a close friendship or association. To qualify as an Individual Bond the person must be someone the Protagonist believes (hopes?) to be still alive. \par
Each Individual Bond begins with a score equal to your Protagonist\rquote s CHA. It cannot typically go above this value.\par
\pard\b Sample Individual Bonds\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Spouse or ex-spouse\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Son or daughter\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Parent or grandparent\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Best friend\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Members of the same gang or band (see \b BONDS FORMED THROUGH SHARED ADVERSITY\b0 , below)\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Spiritual counsellor\i\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\f0 Changes to Individual Bonds During Play\par
\pard\cf0\i0\f1 Bonds\rquote  scores often deteriorate because of your Protagonist\rquote s experiences of the horrors of the Mythos-haunted world. A Bond increases if it is cultivated between adventures (see \b DOWNTIME\b0  on page \lang3081 80\lang1033 ). An Individual Bond can never have a score higher than your Protagonist\rquote s CHA. Any time CHA drops, each Individual Bond drops by the same amount.\par
Individual Bonds are vulnerable. If the Protagonist learns that the individual has died or gone permanently insane, the Bond is destroyed. The Bond is also permanently broken when its score drops to 0 (see \b BROKEN BONDS\b0 , nearby).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.8.2\tab Community Bonds\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A Community Bond is a relationship between the Protagonist and a broader community of individuals; it reflects the Protagonist\rquote s status within that community, and the likelihood of other people following his or her instructions or desires. \par
A community may be a geographical association of people or it may be a society of like-minded individuals (e.g., a club, congregation, or association). A Protagonist can have more than one Community Bond, each describing his or her status within the hierarchy of a different societal structure.\par
Community Bonds are measured on a scale of 1 to 20, with an indicative meaning shown below:\par
\b Rating\tab\tab What the Rating Represents\par
\pard\b0 1\tab\tab Disgraced member; on the verge of being banished from the society.\par
2-4\tab\tab Shunned member of the community; someone who is actively looked down on by most\par
5-8\tab\tab Standard member of the community; one of the pack, whose opinion is unlikely to matter\par
9-12\tab\tab Well-regarded member of the community; favorably viewed by many other members\par
\pard\fi-1440\li1440 13-16\tab Important member of the community; respected by most other members\par
17-18\tab Influential member of community, involved in most decision-making; liked by most\par
19\tab An extremely influential member of the community, looked up to by virtually everyone\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 20\tab\tab Top-tier of leadership in the community; the head honcho.\par
\pard If a Community Bond is chosen during the creation of your Protagonist, it typically begins with a default rating of \ul half\ulnone  the Protagonist\rquote s Permanent Resources rating, rounded up (see \b RESOURCES\b0  on page \lang3081 22\lang1033 ). In a few cases, a Protagonist\rquote s Archetype indicates that he or she has a Community Bond with a certain fixed rating \endash  the final rating should be either that value or half the Permanent Resources rating, whichever is higher. \par
This value can be optionally increased during the creation of your Protagonist by sacrificing one or more \b BONUS SKILL POINT\b0  picks (see page \lang3081 30\lang1033 ); the first skill pick sacrificed in this manner gives a bonus of +5 to the Community Bond\rquote s rating; each subsequent sacrifice adds +2 (to a maximum of 20). \par
It is also possible to elect for your Protagonist to take a Community Bond with a rating of 1 (and suffer the social effects of being a pariah to fellow members) and receive one extra Bonus Skill Point Pick to use on purchasing skills later in the process.\par
\b Sample Community Bonds\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Group which shelters in the same place\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Church or support group\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Craft or trade guild\i\par
\i0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Secret society\i\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\f0 Changes to Community Bonds During Play\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 The rating for a Community Bond applies individually to every member of that community, and to the community as a whole. If a Community Bond decreases in value, the relationship with each member of the community deteriorates. A Community Bond is permanently broken when its score drops to 0 (and the Protagonist is likely cast out of the nominated community). \par
If the community itself is entirely destroyed (e.g., every member killed or sent insane), or if the Protagonist permanently leaves it (e.g., by relocating to live in a new region) the bond is destroyed.\par
If a Community Bond is broken by either means, the Protagonist will likely suffer negative impacts (see \b BROKEN BONDS\b0 , nearby).\par
During play, events may arise where the reactions of NPCs from the Protagonist\rquote s bonded community (or the community as a whole) have an impact. In some cases, the Protagonist may instigate such situations (e.g., by requesting aid from the community or trying to convince them of impending danger). In such situations the Game Moderator may ask for a test against \b Community Bond Rating \'d7 5.\b0  Success means that the NPC or the community reacts favorably.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.8.3\tab Describing Bonds\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Identify each Individual and Community Bond: \ldblquote My Wife.\rdblquote  \ldblquote My Husband and Kids.\rdblquote  \ldblquote My church congregation.\rdblquote  \ldblquote The Society of Amateur Sleuths.\rdblquote  \par
An Individual Bond must be a real person or group of people who the Protagonist believes to be alive, and with which there is some (potential) opportunity to interact. \par
A Community Bond must be a real group who recognizes the Protagonist as a member.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.8.4\tab Broken Bonds\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 When a Bond deteriorates, that relationship becomes strained. Exactly what shape that takes in play is up to you and the Game Moderator (playing the NPCs). \par
Bonds often fall apart because of events beyond your Protagonist\rquote s control. An example for Individual Bonds: your Protagonist\rquote s husband might leave for another woman. An example for Community Bonds: a new leader might ascend to power who is actively antagonistic towards your Protagonist.\par
If such a disaster harms the subject of a Bond, that reduces the Bond\rquote s value by 1D4. If that disaster permanently removes the subject of the Bond, that Bond is gone. Cross it off the sheet.\par
\pard When damage to a Bond reduces it to 0, the relationship is damaged beyond repair. Cross it off the sheet. The only way to regain a Bond with that character or community is to build it from scratch as if it had never existed (see \b DOWNTIME\b0  on page \lang3081 80\lang1033  for details on creating new Bonds).\par
The breaking of any Bond is almost certainly traumatic and is likely to trigger a Sanity test due to Helplessness (see page \lang3081 70\lang1033 ).\par
When you cross a Bond off your Protagonist\rquote s character sheet, don\rquote t erase it. After all, there\rquote s no forgetting a vital relationship that went bad. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.8.5\tab Bonds Forged Through Shared Adversity\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Protagonists often band together into small tight-knit groups, to enhance their chances. This is true when the group is alone in the wasteland; it\rquote s often also true even when they are outsiders in a larger settlement. If those tight-knit groups go through terrifying ordeals together, there is a strong chance that they will become psychologically bound together through that shared experience. \par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 In game terms, groups of Protagonists tend to form individual bonds to one another when they spend most of their time fighting the forces of the Mythos. Whenever your Protagonist is part of a team that completes a harrowing adventure, there\rquote s a chance of such trauma-generated bonds forming or deepening. This is the case if the scenario played out in a way where:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 One or more members of the team suffered temporary insanity, or\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 One or more members of the team gained a new psychological disorder, or\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 One or more members of the team died or was incapacitated by physical injuries, or\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Any other event occurred that the Game Moderator thinks was shocking enough to constitute severe trauma.\par
\pard In the downtime after the adventure (see \b DOWNTIME\b0  on page \lang3081 80\lang1033 ), all Protagonists that made it back must make a SAN test. If the roll succeeds, nothing changes. If your Protagonist fails the SAN roll, he or she gains or strengthens an individual bond with EACH fellow Protagonist who also made it through the same trauma (up to a maximum of five fellow Protagonists). \par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 For each such fellow trauma-sufferer,\par
\pard\fi-360\li825\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If your Protagonist has \b no previous bond\b0  with that person, he or she gains a brand-new individual Bond to that person at a rating equal to half your Protagonist\rquote s CHA. Add the new Bond to your Protagonist\rquote s character sheet. This focusing of attention comes at a detrimental cost to other pre-existing Bonds \endash  you must lose 1D4 points from one other bond of your choice (either an Individual or Community Bond).\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If your Protagonist \b already has an Individual Bond\b0  with that person, the bond is increased by 1D4 points (up to a maximum value equal to CHA); at the same time 1 point must be subtracted from another bond of the player\rquote s choice (either an Individual or Community Bond). Note that even if all your Protagonist\rquote s existing bonds are already at the maximum score (and hence can\rquote t increase), you still need to pick a bond to weaken by 1.\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Remember that if a Bond is ever reduced to 0 or less it is broken, as per the previous section. \par
When choosing a Bond to weaken during this process you CANNOT pick a bond to an individual who was with your Protagonist on the recently completed adventure. You MAY, however, pick an Individual Bond gained from an earlier shared traumatic encounter.\par
Rather than treating this as a mechanical process, you and your Game Moderator are encouraged to work together to describe the changed dynamic between your Protagonist and those around them. If points have been gained with fellow adventurers, does that mean they are beginning to feel comfort that their colleagues will always have their back? Or has the shared experience kindled a romance of sorts? Conversely, if a bond has been weakened, does that mean the Protagonist has been neglecting a member of their circle of friends and both are now feeling their friendship is slipping away? \par
If a community bond has weakened does it mean that the excessive time spent socializing with the tight-knit group has alienated others in the community to the point that they have lost confidence in the Protagonist? Or has he or she just missed so many gatherings that their standing as a high-status member of society has eroded?\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.9\tab Detailed Description: Bonus Skill Points\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The skill package associated with your Protagonist\rquote s Archetype coupled with the Adversity skills from the harshness of his or her upbringing, represent his or her core proficiencies. But they certainly aren\rquote t the full story about everything the Protagonist is good at. \par
Each Protagonist \b begins with ten Bonus Skill Point Picks\b0 . Each pick provides a boost of 20 points to whichever skill it is applied. Alternatively, some of these skill picks can be \b traded-in\b0  for non-skill benefits instead (see box nearby). \par
When applying a skill pick to a skill which has NOT been set by the Protagonist\rquote s Archetype or increased through Adversity Skill Picks, then add the 20 to its \b base rating\b0 . Otherwise, add 20 to its \b current score\b0 . This allows your Protagonist to specialize in certain Archetypal skills or to learn a little about skills not included in his or her Archetype. You can even boost a single skill more than once, adding +20 each time. \par
Unless the Game Moderator says otherwise, you can\rquote t raise a skill higher than 80% during Protagonist creation. You must assign (or trade-in) all bonus points to skills before play begins.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10684\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb80\sa120\cf2\b\f0 Trading-in Skill Point Picks\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 As described in previous sections on \b RESOURCES\b0  (page \lang3081 22\lang1033 ) and \b BONDS\b0  (page \lang3081 26\lang1033 ), you have the option during Protagonist creation to trade-in one or more Bonus Skill Picks in return for non-skill advantages. Alternatively, your Protagonist can earn an \i extra\i0  Bonus Skill Pick or two if you are willing to sacrifice some of the normal benefits of those other starting ratings.\par
\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\cf1\i\f0 Trading Skill Point Picks for Resources Rating\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\i0\f1 You may elect to sacrifice one or more Bonus Skill Point Picks to improve your Protagonist\rquote s starting rating in Permanent Resources:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Sacrificing one Bonus Skill Point Pick grants a +5 increase to Permanent Resources. \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Sacrificing further Bonus Picks grants +2 for each extra pick sacrificed. \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 There is no limit to how high the Permanent Resources rating can go. \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Note that boosting Permanent Resources rating will also increase the starting value of all Community Bonds (which start equal to half this value).\par
\pard\intbl As an alternative, if you are willing for your Protagonist to have a Resources rating of 0 (absolutely without any worldly goods), that sacrifice earns one EXTRA Bonus Skill Point Pick.\par
\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\cf1\i\f0 Trading Skill Point Picks for Community Bond Rating\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\i0\f1 You can elect to sacrifice one or more Bonus Skill Point Picks to improve the starting rating of your Protagonist\rquote s Community Bonds. \par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Sacrificing one Bonus Skill Point Pick grants a +5 increase to the value of \b one\b0  Community Bond. \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Sacrificing further Bonus Picks to the \b same Bond\b0  grants +2 for each extra pick sacrificed. Sacrificing a pick towards a different Bond achieves the full increase stated above.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Community Bond strengths can only be increased to a maximum of 20 (at which point your Protagonist is the community\rquote s top leader).\par
\pard\intbl\sa120 As an alternative, if you are willing for your Protagonist to set a Community Bond to a value of 1 (ready to break at the slightest provocation, with possibly disastrous social outcome), that sacrifice earns one EXTRA Bonus Skill Point Pick. You can claim this reward multiple times if you wish to set several Community Bonds to 1.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 2.10\tab Detailed Description: Skills\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 A skill represents expertise gained with intensive training or study. If you make a skill roll, your Protagonist is doing something that would leave untrained people lost. \par
\lang3081 Anyone can attempt a \b DEX\'d75\b0  test to avoid being knocked over in the back of an out-of-control wagon; only someone who\rquote s been trained in the proper Drive skill can steer the battered vehicle away from the grasping, tentacled thing tearing at its wheels.\lang1033  \par
Roll your Protagonist\rquote s skill or lower on 1D100 to succeed at using the skill under dire circumstances. Skills improve through practice and experience.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.10.1\tab Base Rating\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Every skill lists its base rating. If a skill has a base rating of 1% or greater, anyone can attempt to use it. A skill at 0% can\rquote t be used at all. No skill can be higher than 99%.\par
\pard\b Rating\tab\tab What the Rating Represents\par
\b0 01% to 19% \tab Dabbler.\par
20% to 29% \tab A dedicated hobbyist; with a foreign language you can have rudimentary conversations.\par
30% to 39% \tab Equivalent of a dedicated basic training.\par
\pard\fi-1440\li1440 40% to 59% \tab Equivalent of a dedicated advanced training or years of practical experience; with 50% in a foreign language you have native fluency.\par
\pard 60% to 79% \tab Decades of experience, or equivalent of the highest level of advanced training.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 80% to 99% \tab A lifetime\rquote s pursuit or equivalent of multiple related training qualifications.\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 Base Ratings for Skills\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\cf0\f1\fs20 >> Skills and Base Ratings\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft-108\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5233\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10574\pard\intbl\lang3081\b0\fs22 Alchemy (0)\par
Alertness (20)\par
Animal Handling (10)\par
Appraise (10)\par
Art (Type) (0)\par
Athletics (30)\par
Beguile (20)\par
Carouse (0)\par
Chirurgery (0)\par
Ciphers (0)\par
Craft (Type) (10)\par
Disguise (10)\par
Dodge (30)\par
Drive (20)\par
First Aid (10)\par
Folklore (10)\par
Forage/Hunt (10)\par
Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type) (0)\par
Foreign Language (Type) (0)\par
Harangue/Taunt (10)\par
Herb Lore (20)\par
History (10)\par
Homeland (0)\lang1033\fs20\cell\lang3081\fs22 Insight (10)\par
Literacy (0)\par
Melee Weapons (30)\par
Navigate (10)\par
Occult (Type) (10)\par
Persuade (20)\par
Procuratio (0)\par
Quadrivium (0)\par
Ranged Weapons (20)\par
Reassure (10)\par
Religion (Type) (10)\par
Repair/Devise (0)\par
Ride (10)\par
Sailing (Type) (0)\par
Scavenge (10)\par
Search (20)\par
Siege Weapons (0)\par
Stealth (10)\par
Swim (20)\par
Trivium (0)\par
Unarmed Combat (40)\par
Unnatural (0)\lang1033\fs20\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs22\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.10.2\tab How Skills Work\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 For details of specific skills, see the listing in \b SKILL DESCRIPTIONS\b0  starting on page \lang3081 32\lang1033 . \par
When your Protagonist uses a skill, sometimes you roll dice and sometimes you don\rquote t.\par
\b USING A SKILL WITHOUT A ROLL:\b0  When circumstances are calm and controlled, you don\rquote t roll dice to have your Protagonist use a skill; the Game Moderator just needs to know how high your Protagonist\rquote s rating is. \par
\lang3081 For example, controlling a river barge when things are calm might simply require a certain amount the appropriate Sailing skill.\lang1033  \par
Using a skill without rolling means randomness is not a factor. It\rquote s about having the right skill, looking in the right place, and asking the right questions. The more subtle the clue, the higher the skill your Protagonist must have to figure it out.\par
\b USING A SKILL WITH A ROLL:\b0  Roll skill dice only when the outcome is in doubt. That usually means there\rquote s a crisis or the circumstances are not under your Protagonist\rquote s control. The higher the skill rating, the better your Protagonist\rquote s chance of success. For details, see \b USING SKILLS\b0  on page \lang3081 41\lang1033 .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.10.3\tab Common Knowledge\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Most Protagonists picked up some basic knowledge as they grew up. Because of this, they have some basic understanding of common things like how their society works and what types of jobs do what; and some basic abilities like how to flee danger. These don\rquote t require specific skills. Skills represents deep, specialized training or education, but Protagonists can sometimes get by on common knowledge. Calling on common knowledge requires an \b INT\'d75\b0  test or having a certain level of INT. Charming someone with unskilled art is usually a \b CHA\b0  or \b DEX\b0  test. Other efforts use other stats. The Game Moderator decides whether a task requires the general ability of a stat or the specialization of a skill.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.10.4\tab Improving Skills\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 We learn from failure. If your Protagonist has at least 1% in a skill (any except Unnatural), it can improve when your Protagonists attempts to use it and \i fails\i0 . Gaining an entirely new skill requires special training (see \b DOWNTIME \b0 on page \lang3081 80\lang1033 ).\par
On the character sheet, next to every skill except Unnatural, there is a check box. When your Protagonist tries to use a skill and fails, put a checkmark in that skill\rquote s box. At the end of each game session, add 1D4 percentage point to every skill that has a check next to it and erase the check.\par
\b FAILING WITHOUT ROLLING:\b0  If your Protagonist attempts a challenging task that requires a certain level of skill but not a roll, and fails because the task requires more skill than your Protagonist has, put a check in the box.\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 2.10.5\tab Skill Descriptions\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b0\i Alchemy\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
Alchemy is pseudo-chemistry wrapped in mysticism designed to prolong life, find a universal cure for disease, turn lead into gold, or any fantastical goal. It draws heavily on ancient sources, wraps them in religious trappings, and bottles it.  Alchemy as a skill is by no means limited to those educated in the classics. Many wise women and cunning men know as much about alchemy as a Palatinate scholar who claims to have studied with the Arabs.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Alertness\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
Alertness detects danger. Use it to hear a weapon being readied, to understand the mumbling on the other side of a wall, to spot a concealed item hidden under a jacket, or to catch someone who is trying to escape notice using Stealth.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Animal Handling\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Animals are part and parcel of medieval life. Everyone has a basic understanding of caring for and trying to control animals. Animal handling can be used to calm a spooked horse, quiet a barking dog, or even train a squirrel to perform tricks. \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Animal handling can\rquote t be by a rider to control a mount. That\rquote s the \b Ride\b0  skill.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Appraise\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 The ability to quickly determine the true (intrinsic) value of an item. This is an important skill in ensuring that bartering exchange deals are favorable to you. It is also helpful in know what items or resources others might be willing to trade to obtain.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Art (Type)\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Expertise at creating or performing a work that sways emotions and opinions. It also encompasses knowledge of techniques and trends in your field, and the ability tell a particular creator\rquote s real work from a fake. Anyone can draw a rough sketch; the Art skill reflects knowledge, practice, and talent. Each type of Art is a separate skill: Acting, Dance, Forgery, Music, Poetry, Sculpture, Singing, Storytelling, etc.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Athletics\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 30%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Your Protagonist trains to get the most out of his or her strength and agility. Strength and Dexterity cover raw physical power and manual dexterity; the Athletics skill represents long practice doing things like running, jumping, climbing, and throwing.\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 Use Athletics to:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Outrun someone (see \b OPPOSED TESTS\b0  on page 45).\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Jump an intimidating gap.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Climb in a crisis.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Land safely in a fall of up to three yards.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Hit a target with a thrown knife or put a ceramic grenade exactly on target.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Catch something without warning, such as intercepting a thrown grenade.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Beguile\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 In the feudal world, oftentimes the best way to convince someone to do what you want them to do, is by appealing to their sense of power or self-importance. This delicate art combines guile, cunning, \ldblquote buttering-up\rdblquote , or other such subtle techniques to curry favor and obtain leverage.\par
Beguiling is not about open threats, teasing, or aggressive bluster \endash  that is covered by the \b Harangue/Taunt\b0  skill. Nor is it about using cold logic to convince them (that\rquote s \b Persuade\b0 ). Rather, this skill is about using wile and cunning, coupled with a detailed understanding of the authority and power wielded by the person, to gain advantage.\par
If the target of the skill starts from an antagonistic viewpoint, some form of \b OPPOSED TEST\b0  will probably be needed to overcome their negative impression. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Carouse\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 People have a variety of ways of reveling and relaxing when the work-day is through. This skill combines a knowledge of such social distractions and indulgences, and a practiced skill in partaking \endash  and perhaps excelling \endash  in their practice.\par
Use it to know the particular forms of entertainments that certain classes of society are likely to crave, and the people and places who are able to satisfy them \endash  whether legally or otherwise.\par
When participating in a leisure activity, this skill can be called upon when endurance or skillful practice of the revelry would achieve an advantage. One such use might be retaining one\rquote s faculties even when imbibing excessive intoxicating drinks. Another might be winning at games of chance commonly used for wagering (in this case, the skill is likely to be part of an OPPOSED TEST against other players\rquote  \b Carouse\b0 , with sly attempts at cheating covered by the \b Stealth\b0  skill).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Chirurgury\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard The treatment of an injury or abnormality, by invasive means. By comparison, \b First Aid\b0  keeps a patient alive until surgery is possible, and \b Herb Lore\b0  allows for medicinal preparations to be administered which might help with long term recovery. (See \b HEALING\b0  on page 53)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Ciphers\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
The knowledge of methods whereby the meaning of a message (verbal, written, or other) can be hidden from prying eyes. Use it to encode a message you want to safely send, or to decode a message written by someone else. \par
Note that when working with written messages, your effective rating in this skill is capped by your Literacy skill \endash  tests will usually be against the lower of the two.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Craft (Type)\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Making and repairing sophisticated tools and structures. A job that most people could figure out does not require the Craft skill, only an INT or DEX test. Use Craft for specialized work that needs training: Craft (Mechanic) to get a broken apparatus working \emdash  or to sabotage one beyond repair; Craft (Locksmith) to open a lock without a key, and so on.  \par
The Game Moderator decides whether a task requires Craft. Each Craft type is a separate skill: Blacksmith, Carpenter, Farmer, Woodworker, etc.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Disguise\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Alter your Protagonist\rquote s appearance, voice, posture, body language, and mannerisms to avoid recognition without drawing attention.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Dodge\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 30%\par
\pard Evading danger through instinct and reflexes. Use Dodge to avoid an attack. Against ranged weapons and explosives, Dodge is only useful to get to cover (see \b DODGING RANGED ATTACKS\b0  on page 52).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Drive\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Handling any ground-based vehicle or conveyance (carts, wagons, etc.) safely in a crisis. Unless the Game Moderator says otherwise, every Protagonist can drive safely in normal conditions. Use this skill to keep a vehicle safe in a tense pursuit or on dangerous terrain.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 First Aid\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard The initial treatment and stabilization of injuries. Use it to help a character recover lost Hit Points. By comparison, \b Chirurgury\b0  corrects a severe wound and Apothecary ensures long-term medical treatment and recovery. (See \b HEALING\b0  on page 53.)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Folklore\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
Folklore is the knowledge of the customs and lore of the common people of region. It is used to deduce the proper way to enter a house, whether to walk around the field widdershins prior to planting winter wheat, or in what order to propitiate the saints. It\rquote s also useful when trying to understand the myths and legends of region, such as what creature is said to live in the lake or why the eastern face of the mountain has no trees.\par
At the Game Master\rquote s discretion, separate folklore skills for different regions may be used or the Game Master can apply a penalty the farther a protagonist travels from their home.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Forage/Hunt\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
Forage/Hunt is used to find edible food in the wilderness. The appropriate tools are required, such a bow, spear, or other weapon to hunt animals. It also covers dressing the prey and preparing it for storage.\par
A successful roll provides enough food for a group of four to eat for a week.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Foreign Court/Kingdom (Type)\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 The feudal world is a vast and sprawling place, and while many people know some very basic details of each far-flung power \endash  a place name or two and where it is \endash  detailed knowledge is limited to those who have spent substantial time living, serving, or studying there.\par
This skill represents such deep understanding of the people, places, and common practices that are unique to one colonial outpost. Use it to recall details of the local climate, local peoples, history, and local government arrangement. It can also cover quirky beliefs or discoveries that have come to be common knowledge among residents.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Foreign Language (Type)\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
Fluency in another language. Each foreign language is a distinct skill. Having 20% allows halting conversations; at 50% your Protagonist speaks and reads like a native. The greater the skill, the greater the complexity of the information your Protagonist comprehends and the less time it takes. You don\rquote t need to roll a Foreign Language skill unless the Game Moderator says the situation is exceptionally difficult.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Being able to speak a language doesn\rquote t necessarily mean you can read or write text in that language; attempts to do that are also determined by the \b Literacy\b0  skill. The Game Moderator might require separate rolls against both skills or a single roll applied across both tests, depending on the situation.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Harangue/Taunt\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
The art of either browbeating someone into agreeing with your point of view, or of enraging them to the point where they will lose control and act in an undisciplined way that is advantageous to you.\par
This technique is not a subtle attempt to convince someone through a well-reasoned argument (that\rquote s \b Persuade\b0 ). Nor is it a tempt to appeal to their sense of power and importance (that\rquote s \b Beguile\b0 ). Instead, Harangue/Taunt is all about bluster, shouting, and threats. But sometimes these can be more successful than other techniques, although the individuals on the receiving end are unlikely to enjoy the interaction quite so much.\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Taunting is a related discipline, namely an attempt to insult or belittle verbal opponents to the point where they lose their temper and say or do something rash (which they will usually later regret). In some cultures, this is a well-established way of winning an argument or establishing superiority in the minds of the community.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Herb Lore\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
Herb Lore is an understanding of herbs, the proper method to collect them, where to find them, when to find them, and what can be done with them. \par
The \b Alchemy\b0  skill is used to turn herbs into poultices, salves, and other useful products including medical preparations.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 History\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Uncovering facts and theories about human antiquity. Use it to remember or find a key fact about the distant past, recognize an obscure reference, or comb through records that nobody without your deep education could find. History is a broad study of humanity.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 In the Medieval Era, history can be as much about listening to chansons, gestae, and stories around the campfire as reading old scrolls in one of the few libraries in the world.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Homeland\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Homeland represents a protagonist\rquote s general knowledge about their homeland. Who\rquote s in charge, basic geography, known power struggles, which lord owns a certain village, etc. \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 History, Folklore, and other more specific skills should be used to gain in-depth knowledge.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Insight\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
Insight obtains information about a person \emdash  especially information the subject would rather conceal \emdash  through observation, conversation, or examining patterns of behavior and relationships. Use Insight to recognize signs of dishonesty from verbal cues and body language, gauge attitude and intentions, cultivate sources of information about a subject, determine what it would take to get a subject to cooperate, or recognize clues of what a subject wants to conceal. \par
\pard Insight can notice signs of mental illness but Reassure would be needed to assist with a specific malady. A subject who deliberately tries to deceive your Protagonist can attempt an opposed test comparing their Persuade against your Protagonist\rquote s Insight (see \b OPPOSED TESTS\b0  on page 45).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Literacy\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 The ability to read and write your own native language and any other language you have learned. In this era not everyone is taught to be literate, despite it being important (perhaps even necessary) to performing certain jobs. If you want your Protagonist to be able to interpret or create documents, he or she will need to have at least a basic rating in this skill. As a shorthand, anyone with a Literacy skill below 10 is considered functionally \b illiterate\b0 ; a skill rating between 11 and 40 represents \b semi-literacy\b0 ; a rating above 40 denotes a \b fully literate\b0  individual.\par
The skill does not need to be purchased separately for each of the languages known; it is assumed that the basics of reading and writing common alphabets does not need to be re-learned. Note that in many cases where a document written in a foreign language needs to be comprehended, this will likely involve skill tests of BOTH Literacy and the requisite \b Foreign Language\b0  skill. It is the GM\rquote s discretion as to whether tests should involve a single die roll compared to both skills, or separate rolls against each.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Melee Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 30%\par
Lethal use of melee weapons and shields in combat. Use it to hurt or kill an opponent with a knife, axe, club, or other hand-held weapon.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Navigate\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
Finding your way quickly with maps, charts and tables, orienteering, compass, or dead reckoning.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Occult (Type)\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
The study of the supernatural as understood by human traditions, including things like magick, the hermetic tradition, and secret societies. Use Occult to examine and deduce the intent of a ritual, or to identify occult traditions, groups, grimoires, tools, symbols, or legends. Occult can never tell a Protagonist what\rquote s genuinely unnatural and what\rquote s just superstition or mythology. That\rquote s the province of the Unnatural skill.\par
Occult is the more academic counterpart to \b Folklore\b0 . Successful Folklore and Occult rolls could provide the same information, viewed through different filters.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Persuade\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Changing another\rquote s deeply held decision or desire. Use Persuade to get your Protagonist\rquote s way when the subject is so stubborn, what your Protagonist wants is so valuable, or the deception is so flagrant that Charisma isn\rquote t enough. \par
\pard With Persuade, your Protagonist might convince a witness that what she saw was innocuous and not unnatural, talk a compound leader into helping you cover up an outbreak to avoid a mass panic, or draw useful information out of an unwilling subject. This skill also allows your Protagonist to resist persuasion and interrogation in opposed Persuade rolls (see \b OPPOSED TESTS\b0  on page 45).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Procuratio\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 A knowledge of how bureaucracies work and what kinds of forms, paperwork, journals, etc. it invariably generates. Use it to sift through detailed charters or pipe rolls to find that one quirky point that just doesn\rquote t seem to fit the usual pattern. \par
Use this skill to rapidly navigate your way adeptly through written records to find what\rquote s important. It can also be useful in determining forgeries. Forged charters are a common scheme that can catch someone just skinning documents off guard.\par
Note that this skill is primarily about interpreting information you have; if you need to actively go out and track down books, records, etc. that would be covered by either the \b Search\b0  skill, some combination of social skills, or perhaps \b Carouse \b0 (depending on the mode of searching).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Quadrivium\lang3081\f1\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 The Quadrivium represents part, along with the Trivium, of a medieval scholar\rquote s areas of study. The quadrivium encompasses the disciplines of the liberal arts: music, astronomy, arithmetic and geometry.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Ranged Weapons\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 The ability to accurately hit targets with ranged weapons such as Bows, Crossbows, and Slings.\par
This skill isn\rquote t used for thrown weapons like Spears \endash  those make use of the \b Athletics\b0  skill instead.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Reassure\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Use this skill to understand the mental illness afflicting a person, help an afflicted person along the journey back to sanity, or talk someone down when the mental illness threatens to take hold.\par
You can also use this skill to assist in social interactions with someone, to calm them from an agitated state in order to extract information from them. You cannot use Reassure on yourself. \par
\pard Using Reassure to aid someone who suffered exposure to Unnatural forces might cost the reassuring Survivor SAN; see \b THREATS TO SAN\b0  on page 70\lang1033 .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Religion (Type)\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
A detailed knowledge of one of the several common belief systems that are known to exist, each providing its own account of the divine and explanations for the ways of the observed natural world. \par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Use it to know the differences between the beliefs of varying denominations of the particular religion, or to be able to recite passages from common religious texts. It doesn\rquote t include knowledge of obscure or fringe beliefs associated with the religion; details of such hidden wisdom are covered by the relevant \b Occult\b0  skill instead.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Repair/Devise\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
With many settlements isolated by a day or more journey from each other, self-reliance is key. The ability to repair broken equipment or create impromptu fixes for unexpected break-downs is vital.\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Repair/Devise is not a craft skilled. It\rquote s designed to make some work just long enough to get the job done (hopefully). Many other \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  settings use Craft (Jury-Rig). Repair/Devise takes the place of that in this setting.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Ride\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Handling, training, and riding an animal \emdash  horses, donkeys, camels, whatever. Use it to keep safe on an animal in a crisis and to keep riding animals safe, calm, and healthy.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Sailing (Type)\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Piloting, navigating, and captaining waterborne vehicles. Use it to keep a boat or ship safe in a crisis, such as through a storm or in a dangerous pursuit. Each vessel type is a separate skill: Small Boat, Ship, Canoe, etc.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Scavenge\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
The world is full of useful items, although most people don\rquote t know where to go looking for the good stuff. Use this skill to find and salvage helpful pieces of equipment or locate valuable resources like food and water. Anyone can find items in places where they are likely to be found (e.g., food in a larder); use this skill to find things in places where nobody else would think to look.\par
\pard Depending on the game setting and the scarcity of the item being sought, the difficulty of Scavenge tests and the quality of the items unearthed by successful rolls may vary. See \b SCROUNGING\b0  starting page 64.\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Note that efforts to rummage for information rather than items is handled by social or knowledge skills instead.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Search\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
\pard\sa240\sl276\slmult1 Finding things that are concealed or obscured from plain sight. Searching an abandoned dwelling may not require the Search skill, only time and effort, or a sufficiently high INT. Use Search to find an object that was hidden with the Stealth skill or is otherwise so well hidden or disguised that it needs an expert. The Game Moderator may roll the Search attempt, so you don\rquote t know whether your Protagonist succeeded or failed.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Siege Weapons\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
A large part of medieval warfare are sieges. Towns, castles, monasteries, cities, even islands can be besieged. \par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 This skill provides knowledge on how to use, maintain, and defend against the various siege weapons on the battlefield. It isn\rquote t just a skill for warrior classes, peasants are often press-ganged into serving on siege weapon crews.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Stealth\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 10%\par
\pard Concealing your presence or activities. Use it to hide a weapon, camouflage a position, conceal an occult amulet, pick a pocket, move silently, follow without being seen, or blend into a crowd. A Protagonist attempting Stealth can be detected only by an opposing Alertness or Search skill (see \b OPPOSED TESTS\b0  on page 45).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Swim\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 20%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Most Protagonists can swim for leisure. Use the Swim skill in a dangerous crisis: going a long distance in choppy water, keeping a friend from drowning, or getting to a boat before the tentacled thing below grabs you.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Trivium\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Trivium is the \ldblquote lesser\rdblquote  of the two liberal arts. It comprises rhetoric, grammar, and logic. It can be useful for player characters trying to make sense of all the information they\rquote ve been given.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Unarmed Combat\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 40%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Self-defense. A fight between untrained combatants often involves more shoving and shouting than real violence. Use Unarmed Combat to hurt or kill an opponent with your Protagonist\rquote s bare hands (or feet, elbows, teeth, or head).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Unnatural\par
\pard\sa80\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Base Rating: 0%\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Knowledge of the fundamental, mind-shattering secrets of the universe. The things that slithered in the dark corners of the world and the cosmos beyond. Use it to remember, recognize, or research facts about the things humans consider unnatural. This goes far beyond the occult, because the Unnatural skill represents things that are real. Use it to sift through the darkest parts of myth and folklore and recognize which of it is true. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0\fs26 2.11\tab Detailed Description: Mental Damage from Harsh Upbringings\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Protagonists that have grown up in difficult and brutal conditions are likely to have picked up some mental scarring along the way. This can leave them hardened to certain types of traumatic stimuli. It might also make them psychologically distant from those around them, or even afflicted with mental disorders.\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 Mental Damage gained from a harsh early life can take several forms: \par
\pard\fi-360\li720 1.\tab Becoming adapted to specific types of psychological trauma (see \b\caps Adapting to SAN Loss\b0\caps0 , page \lang3081 77\lang1033 ),\par
\b 2.\tab MENTAL DISORDERS\b0  (page \lang3081 73\lang1033 ), or \par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1 3.\tab Generally becoming more distant with other people.\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 The table below shows the possible mental damage to your Protagonist based on the Harshness Descriptor for the environment he or she grew up in. \par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2213\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Harshness Descriptor\cell Potential for Mental Damage\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2213\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Normal(ish)\cell None\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2213\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Harsh\cell If CHA or POW Is less than 7, Protagonist loses 1D4 from two Bonds (player choice, each can be either an Individual or Community Bond)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2213\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Very Harsh\cell\pard\intbl\fi-357\li357 1.\tab Make a POW\'d74 test; failure indicates 1 starting mental disorder\par
2.\tab If CHA or POW Is less than 10, Protagonist starts Adapted to either Violence OR Helplessness (pick one; apply the necessary modifiers to stats and bonds, see below)\cell\row\pard Roll to determine mental disorders first; if any are acquired work with the Game Moderator to pick something appropriate from the list of mental disorders starting on page \lang3081 73\lang1033 . \par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 If the Protagonist begins the game Adapted to either Violence or Helplessness place a check mark in the appropriate box on the character sheet and make the following adjustment to statistics and bonds:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If \b Adapted to Violence:\b0  Reduce CHA by 1D6 and subtract the same number from \i every\i0  bond (both Individual and Community).\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If \b Adapted to Helplessness:\b0  Reduce POW by 1D6.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb160\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 3.0\tab The Game\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\i\f1\fs22 Cthulhu Eternal \i0 is a game about unveiling \endash  and perhaps defeating \endash  the horrific yet hidden entities of the Cthulhu Mythos that haunt our reality. The world seems mundane, but this is a fa\'e7ade. In dark corners and hidden places, the extra-dimensional and extra-terrestrial horrors lurk. Most people never learn of their existence, but some come to worship or follow such inimical forces. Others who learn the true nature of reality \endash  of those dark entities, and insane devotees they inspire \endash  cannot help but make a stand to defeat their terrible plans. These are Protagonists. Their fight might be never-ending, but the cost of losing is too great. They are the line that separates the sane world we know and the Apocalypse.  \par
\lang3081 Protagonists are usually every-day people -- from any class of society -- who have been awakened to the truth about our world. They usually aren't superhuman, powerful, or invulnerable. Rather, they are frequently humble, vulnerable, and fragile individuals who have chosen to fight the unknowable but vast powers of the Cthulhu Mythos. Not because they have the strength to conquer the horrors, but because the consequence of inaction is beyond the pale.\lang1033\par
Here\rquote s how the game works.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 3.1\tab Using Skills\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The\i  Cthulhu Eternal \i0 rules focus on \i skills\i0 . You decide what your Protagonist attempts to do; the Game Moderator determines what skill to use. In a typical adventure, Protagonists use many different skills.\par
Sometimes using a skill requires a roll of dice. The most important rule is this: \i The Game Moderator determines if, when, and what you roll\i0 . If the Game Moderator says a roll isn\rquote t needed, the skill rating itself determines success or failure.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb120\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.1.1\tab Resolving a Test Without Dice\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If the Game Moderator decides you don\rquote t need to roll, it comes down to what you\rquote re trying to do and how high your Protagonist\rquote s skill is. If the fact is common knowledge for your Protagonist\rquote s Archetype, or can be found with a little research, he or she might be able to get it by just expending time and effort. If it requires special knowledge, your Protagonist may need a certain amount of a skill.\par
If the Game Moderator thinks a fact should be known by a history expert with at least 60% skill, then a Protagonist with a relevant history-related skill at 60% or better knows the fact without rolling. Or perhaps a Protagonist with 40% can learn some clues but a Protagonist with 60% would learn more.\par
Sometimes a combination of skills can overcome a lack in one. A clue that needs 60% in a history-related skill might be available if the Protagonist has both a history skill \i and\i0  some other relevant skill at 40%.\par
\b How Much Skill Does the Task Require?\par
\pard\b0 Only a little training; a hobbyist \tab\tab\tab 20%\par
Basic training or minor training\tab  \tab\tab 30%\par
Years of experience or training\tab\tab\tab 40%\par
Decades of experience or training\tab\tab 60%\par
A lifetime\rquote s mastery \tab\tab\tab\tab 80%\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.1.2\tab Resolving a Test With Dice\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If the Game Moderator tells you to roll a skill, it\rquote s a skill test. The dice determine success or failure. Roll two ten-sided dice to get a number from 01 to 00 (1 to 100).\par
Roll your skill test rating or lower to succeed. Rolling higher than the skill test rating means failure.\par
There are three criteria for rolling dice for a skill test:\par
\b ROLL WHEN IT IS DIFFICULT:\b0  A skill test means the Protagonist is attempting something \i difficult\i0 . After all, even an expert in a skill might have only a 60% or 70% rating. A skill test is for a situation when even an expert might fail.\par
\b ROLL WHEN THE SITUATION IS UNPREDICTABLE:\b0  Having to roll means the situation is out of control. Randomness plays a major role. Surprising, possibly disastrous things can happen, no matter how skillful you are.\par
\b ROLL WHEN THERE ARE CONSEQUENCES:\b0  Failing a skill roll means ugly things are going to happen. Maybe failing at the crisis is the punishment \emdash  or with a failed roll, your Protagonist succeeds but the consequences are severe. The fallout is up to the Game Moderator.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.1.3\tab If You Don\rquote t Have the Skill\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If your Protagonist has a 0 in a skill, he or she can\rquote t even attempt to use it. It requires specialized training or education that your Protagonist lacks.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.1.4\tab Using a Stat\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If your Protagonist tries to do something that anyone ought to be able to do \emdash  something that\rquote s hard, but doesn\rquote t require specific training like a skill \emdash  then the Game Moderator might look to one of your Protagonist\rquote s stats, for a stat test. A stat test is the relevant stat \'d7 5. (So with STR 11, a STR test is 55%.)\par
Use STR if the challenge requires physical power, CON if it requires endurance, DEX if it requires agility, INT if it requires attention to detail, POW if it requires mental resilience, or CHA if it requires charm.\par
\pard The stat\rquote s score itself may tell the Game Moderator whether your Protagonist succeeds, without the need for a roll. Does it need someone with at least average Strength? Then your Protagonist needs a STR of 10 or more. If it needs someone with above-average Intelligence, your Protagonist must have an INT of at least 13. If only one person in a hundred would have enough stamina, your Protagonist needs a CON of 17 or 18. (See \b DETAILED DESCRIPTION: STATISTICS\b0  on page \lang3081 9\lang1033 .)\par
\b How Much Stat Does the Task Require?\b0\f7\fs24\par
\f1\fs22 Anyone could do it \tab\tab\tab\tab 3\endash 4\par
Nearly anyone could do it \tab\tab\tab 5\endash 8\par
An average person could do it \tab\tab\tab 9\endash 12\par
Only an unusually gifted person could do it\tab 13\endash 16\par
Only a prodigy could do it \tab\tab\tab 17\endash 18\f7\fs24\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs22 3.1.5\tab Bonuses and Penalties\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Having to make a skill test in the first place means there\rquote s a substantial chance of failure. But if the odds are really against your Protagonist, the Game Moderator might impose a penalty, down to a minimum chance of 1%. If the situation is a little more in your Protagonist\rquote s favor, the Game Moderator might allow a bonus, up to a maximum chance of 99%.\par
If a bonus or penalty applies, it\rquote s usually +20%/\u8722?20% or rarely +40%/\u8722?40%.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4082\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8618\pard\intbl Bonus or Penalty\cell Frequency\cell Description\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4082\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8618\pard\intbl +40%\cell Rare\cell You \i almost \i0 shouldn\rquote t even bother to roll\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4082\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8618\pard\intbl +20%\cell Uncommon\cell Circumstances are noticeably in your favor\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4082\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8618\pard\intbl No modifier\cell Most circumstances\cell The action is difficult and unpredictable\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4082\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8618\pard\intbl -20%\cell Uncommon\cell Circumstances are noticeably worse than usual.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4082\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8618\pard\intbl -40%\cell Rare\cell You \i almost \i0 shouldn\rquote t even bother to roll.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.1.6\tab Who Rolls?\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A group of Protagonists is searching the cult leader\rquote s camp. Who makes the Alertness skill roll to spot a trap? Good question.\par
If it\rquote s a task where having more help is useful, use the highest skill among the team.\par
If it\rquote s a task where a crowd is a hindrance, use the lowest skill among the team.\par
If it\rquote s a task where you need to know whether every Protagonist succeeds or fails (\ldblquote How many of you get a good look at the thing in the shadows?\rdblquote ), each player rolls.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 3.2\tab Success and Failure\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 On any skill or stat test, there are only four possible outcomes. From best to worst they are: \i Critical Success, Success, Failure, \i0 and \i Fumble\i0 . Ordinary success and failure are most common. Critical successes and fumbles represent exceptionally good or terrible outcomes.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.2.1\tab Critical Success\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A critical success is a roll of 01 or any success where the dice digits match one another. So if your Protagonist\rquote s skill is 50%, you achieve a critical success with a roll of 01, 11, 22, 33, or 44. A critical success automatically succeeds, and exceeds expectations. A critical is \i twice as good \i0 as an ordinary success. What twice as good means must be taken in context of the action. \b In combat, a critical success means double damage\b0 , but during an investigation, it might mean the action takes half as long.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.2.2\tab Success\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A success is a roll \i equal to or less \i0 than the test chance. With a success, your Protagonist accomplishes what he or she set out to achieve.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.2.3\tab Failure\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A failure is a roll that\rquote s \i higher \i0 than the test chance. Sometimes that means your Protagonist suffers harm.\par
There may be times when a failed roll means a Protagonist achieves what he or she wanted \emdash  but it comes with an unpleasant complication. The Game Moderator always decides whether that\rquote s the case and what the cost will be. For a few possibilities, see the effects of fumbling a roll.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.2.4\tab Fumble\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A fumble is a roll of 00 (100) or any failure where the dice digits match one another. So if your Protagonist\rquote s skill is 50%, you fumble on a roll of 55, 66, 77, 88, 99, or 00. A fumbled roll fails, no matter how high your Protagonist\rquote s chance of success, and has additional, catastrophic consequences.\par
\lang3081 In a horseback chase, a fumble might mean your Protagonist's mount stumbles or collides with an obstacle. When parrying a sword blow, the Protagonist's weapon might break, or their shield be permanently damaged (perhaps even becoming heavily worn or junk)\lang1033  \par
The exact complications are up to the Game Moderator. Here are some possibilities.\par
\b PHYSICAL STRAIN:\b0  Lose 1D6 HP \i or \i0 temporarily lose 1D4 STR, CON, or DEX.\par
\b EMOTIONAL BURNOUT:\b0  Lose 1D6 WP \i or \i0 temporarily lose 1D4 INT, POW, or CHA.\par
\b ALIENATION:\b0  Offend an important NPC. All CHA or \b Persuade\b0  tests with the NPC automatically fail until the end of the adventure.\par
\pard\b EXHAUSTION:\b0  Immediately become \b\caps exhausted\b0\caps0  (see page \lang3081 47\lang1033 ).\par
\b DISTRACTION:\b0  Suffer a \u8722?20% penalty to your next test.\par
\b CONFUSION:\b0  You make a major error and gain false information.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat7\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\b >\lang3081 > Optional Rule: Nudging Skill and Stat Tests\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\b0 By default, as soon as dice are rolled for a skill test or a stat test the result is set in stone \endash  the number rolled determines whether the test was a success, failure, critical success, or fumble. There is no way to change the roll or to re-roll to achieve a different outcome.\par
Some players, however, prefer to have an option for dice rolls to be nudged: for \ldblquote near misses\rdblquote  to be turned into successes at some other cost to the character. This optional rule delivers that, by allowing characters to sacrifice Willpower Points (WPs) to \ldblquote nudge\rdblquote  the dice rolled for a skill or stat test. Using this optional rule makes the game slightly less harsh in terms of the randomness of the dice, but also adds a resource-management element to players rationing their Willpower Points.\par
\pard\intbl\sl276\slmult1 Here\rquote s how nudging works for skill tests and stat tests:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 After a test has been rolled, a player can elect to spend any number of WPs, with each spend adjusting the dice roll either up or down as the player prefers.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Each WP spent adjusts the original dice roll by \b 1\emdash 5 percentiles (player\rquote s choice)\b0 .\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1\ldblquote Nudging\rdblquote  a dice roll that originally indicated a failure may convert it into a roll indicating standard success; alternatively, a dice roll that was originally a standard success may be turned into a failure.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 This process cannot be used to alter the dice roll for a test performed by someone other than the character making the WP spend. Specifically, it cannot be used to modify the dice roll of an adversary.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The sacrifice of WPs represents the character investing extra energy and focus to ensure that a borderline situation is resolved in the desired way. Doing this can trigger exhaustion and may make the tired character more susceptible to being affected by arcane powers, and less prepared to participate in rituals.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1\ldblquote Nudging\rdblquote  a dice roll can never create a critical success or a fumble, and dice rolls that originally indicated a critical success or fumble cannot be \ldblquote nudged\rdblquote . Even if the dice roll total obtained after a \ldblquote nudge\rdblquote  is applied happens to be a number with matching digits, the result is still either a standard success or a failure.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Remember that, as described in \b WILLPOWER POINTS\b0  (page \lang3081 46\lang1033 ), consequences may apply to a character whose WP total falls below 3. \par
\pard\intbl\sb200 Note: only skill tests and stat tests can be \ldblquote nudged\rdblquote  in this way; SAN test and Luck tests cannot be \ldblquote nudged\rdblquote . \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat7\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\i A\lang3081 s with all optional rules, the GM and players should agree before the game whether this rule is to be used. \par
Another question to agree upon is whether \ldblquote nudging\rdblquote  is available \ul solely\ulnone  to Protagonists in the game or also an action that NPCs can perform. \cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\i0\f0\fs26 3.3\tab The Luck Roll\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Events often come down to pure chance. \par
\lang3081 Are adversaries awake when your Protagonist sneaks into the enemy\rquote s camp? Does the stolen reliquary have an ampoule of holy water? When water spills through a leak in the ship's hull and ignites its secret cargo of Greek Fire, are you standing next to it?\lang1033  \par
If the Game Moderator calls for a Luck roll, there\rquote s a 50% chance that things go your Protagonist\rquote s way. It doesn\rquote t depend on psychic talent or your Protagonist\rquote s connection with the cosmos or anything else. Just roll the dice. With a critical success or a fumble, your Protagonist\rquote s luck is extra good or bad.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 3.4\tab Time Required\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Sometimes speed counts. The Game Moderator determines how long it takes to perform a test.\par
\pard\b TURNS:\b0  It takes a few combat turns (see \b THE TURN \b0 on page \lang3081 48\lang1033 ) or, at most, sixty seconds. Combat, some skill tests, and most stat tests are resolved in turns.\par
\b MINUTES:\b0  It takes a few minutes. You can\rquote t do it in combat, but otherwise, your Protagonist can get through it rapidly. Many skill tests are resolved in minutes.\par
\b HOURS:\b0  It takes hours. Your Protagonist can typically attempt two to four such tasks per day (four only if your Protagonist goes without rest; see \b EXHAUSTION\b0  on page \lang3081 47\lang1033 ).\par
\b DAYS:\b0  It takes a day or more. Some extended skill tests, requiring multiple rolls, take days.\par
\b LONG-TERM:\b0  Efforts that take place outside normal gameplay, like research and training, fit here. It could be a week, a month, or years. It\rquote s up to the Game Moderator.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 3.5\tab Opposed Tests\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 An opposed test happens when someone takes action to interfere with another\rquote s action. \par
\lang3081 This might be a player rolling a Protagonist\rquote s Insight to sense the lies in a rich merchant\rquote s Persuade roll, a Protagonist escaping a pursuer with opposed Athletics tests, a degenerate cultist trying to wrestle a sacrificial victim to the ground in opposed Unarmed Combat tests, or a Protagonist\rquote s Dodge trying to oppose an alien monstrosity\rquote s attack roll.\lang1033\par
Usually, skills oppose skills and stats oppose stats. A stat opposes a skill only when one character must use very specific knowledge or training (and therefore rolls a skill) but the other does not (and therefore rolls a stat). It is up to the Game Moderator.\par
By nature, opposed tests are very unlikely to succeed. Not only must your roll succeed, but you must overcome the opposition\rquote s roll as well.\par
If two characters\rquote  skills oppose each other but neither needs to roll, the higher rating wins.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\b\fs24 >> Opposed Tests and Pursuits\b0\fs22\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1814\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6067\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Outcome\cell Opponent Succeeds\cell Opponent Fails\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1814\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6067\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl You Succeed\cell A critical success beats a success. Otherwise, whoever rolled higher succeeds and the other fails.\cell Your action succeeds and the opposed action fails.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh269\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1814\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6067\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl You Fail\cell You fail to stop the opposed action.\cell Nobody succeeds; or whoever rolled lower succeeds and the other fails (Game Moderator\rquote s choice).\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 3.6\tab Pursuit\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 A pursuit is a series of opposed tests. The most basic chase is a single test for each side, pursuer and quarry. If the quarry wins, he or she escapes and the chase ends. If the pursuer wins, he or she (or it) runs the quarry down and the chase ends. Usually that means combat.\par
A more prolonged chase may require two wins by one side or the other. Wins cancel each other out. If the pursuer wins one but the quarry wins the next, that cancels out the pursuer\rquote s win. Then, the quarry needs to win twice more to escape. An especially wide-open chase might require three wins to either catch up or escape.\par
In each test, one side or the other wins. If both fail their rolls, the lowest failure wins. A critical success with a chase test counts as two wins. A fumble counts as two failures thanks to a wreck or some other disastrous accident.\par
\b WHICH SKILL APPLIES:\b0  \lang3081 A chase on foot requires Athletics; one in a wagon or cart uses Drive; one on a waterborne craft uses a Sailing specialization; in the water, it uses Swim; on horseback, it uses Ride.\lang1033\par
\b AID AND ADVANTAGES:\b0  Coordinating with multiple pursuers (whether they\rquote re in sight of each other or have constant contact by some means), or being substantially faster and/or more maneuverable grants a +20% bonus to each chase test, or +40% if the advantages are overwhelming.\par
\b SEEKING AN EDGE:\b0  Instead of the usual roll to catch up or get away, pursuer or quarry may attempt to gain some advantage by testing a skill that applies to the situation.\par
\lang3081 Possible skills include Alertness, Navigate, or Stealth.\lang1033  \par
If this test wins the contest, instead of a \ldblquote win\rdblquote  it grants a +20% bonus to the next chase roll, or +40% with a critical success. Failure and fumbling have the usual effects.\par
\pard\b COMBAT DURING A CHASE:\b0  A person in a chase may be able to launch attacks at opponents, especially if their skill isn\rquote t being used as the test for escaping or evading (e.g., they are a passenger on a conveyance controlled by someone else). These will usually be some form of ranged attack. Such attacks are resolved \i before\i0  the pursuer and quarry roll to pursue and escape. Attacks use the \b COMBAT\b0  rules, beginning on page \lang3081 47\lang1033 . Each contest in the chase is equivalent to one combat turn. \par
If your Protagonist makes an attack but doing so \i will\i0  seriously impact their efforts to pursue or evade, the attack is considered to occur instead of a roll to pursue or escape \endash  effectively meaning the opponent\rquote s roll to pursue or escape automatically wins that exchange. This will always be the case if the pursuit is on foot; in other situations it will depend on whether your Protagonist\rquote s skill at controlling his or her conveyance is a major factor in the chase (if in doubt, the GM can make a call).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 3.7\tab Willpower Points\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Willpower Points are mental fuel. Protagonists require Willpower Points to keep going despite exhaustion, to resist unwanted persuasion, to resist the effects of terror and mental disorders, and, on rare occasions, to resist or enact unnatural rituals.\par
\b LOW WILLPOWER POINTS:\b0  A Protagonist whose WP hits 1 or 2 has an emotional breakdown. The Protagonist suffers a \u8722?20% penalty to all actions until WP rises above 2.\par
\b RUNNING OUT OF WILLPOWER POINTS:\b0  A Protagonist at 0 WP loses all control. This can look different for every Protagonist and every situation. The Protagonist might collapse in wracking sobs, or lash out wildly, or simply pass out. The Game Moderator controls your Protagonist until WP returns to 1 or higher and describes the reaction. A Protagonist with 0 WP cannot succeed at \i any\i0  tests, including SAN tests. Sooner or later the Protagonist falls asleep, regardless of any disorders or stimulants, long enough to regain WP\par
\b REGAINING WILLPOWER POINTS:\b0  When your Protagonist gets a full night\rquote s sleep (but no more than once in a 24-hour period), he or she regains 1D6 WP. If you play up one of your Protagonist\rquote s personal motivations in a way the Game Moderator finds compelling, your Protagonist regains 1 WP.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.7.1\tab Exhaustion\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A Protagonist who works too long or faces extreme danger and injury without resting becomes exhausted. When this comes into play is up to the Game Moderator, but a good rule of thumb is that going a night without sleep or refusing to rest after losing SAN or Hit Points leads to exhaustion.\par
An exhausted Protagonist suffers a \u8722?20% penalty to all skills, stat tests, and SAN tests, and loses 1D6 WP. The exhausted Protagonist loses another 1D6 WP after going another night without sleep, after working hard for a few hours, or after running or fighting for a few minutes. A full night\rquote s sleep cures exhaustion.\par
\lang3081\b STIMULANTS:\b0  Taking common types of stimulants offsets the exhaustion penalty for 1D6 hours. Examples in the Medieval Age might include caffeine, gruit, and mushrooms.\par
During this time, your Protagonist can\rquote t sleep. A Protagonist can take more stimulants to keep going, but every dose after the first costs 1D6 WP.\par
\pard If your Protagonist gains a new mental disorder while using stimulants, the Game Moderator has good reason to say the disorder takes the form of addiction to them. \lang1033 (See \b DISORDERS\b0  on page \lang3081 73\lang1033 .)\lang3081\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1033\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 3.7.2\tab Sleeplessness\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 The first time your Protagonist tries to sleep after suffering temporary insanity or gaining a new mental disorder (see \b TEMPORARY INSANITY\b0  and \b DISORDERS\b0  on page \lang3081 72\lang1033 ), you must make a SAN test. If it fails, your Protagonist wakes in terror, losing the possibility of regaining any WP for 24 hours.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b ARTIFICIAL SEDATION:\b0  A Protagonist may try to overcome sleeplessness via artificial means, such as drinking alcohol or using other similar sedatives. This gives a +20% bonus to the SAN test to get to sleep. If the test fails, the Protagonist gets no rest despite taking sedatives. In addition, the Protagonist is sick the next day, at a \u8722?20% penalty to all tests until he or she gets a full night\rquote s rest. If your Protagonist gains a new mental disorder while using sedatives, the Game Moderator has good reason to say the disorder takes the form of an addiction to them.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 4.0\tab Combat\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 A serious fight, where people are trying \cf3 to kill each other, is chaotic, frightening, and fast. That\rquote s what these rules represent. Being skilled, having better weapons, or being in a superior position helps, but the inescapable randomness of combat can claim even the most skilled combatant\rquote s life.\par
Lovecraft\rquote s fiction presaged humanity\rquote s urge to reduce any confrontation with the unnatural to base combat. However, humanity\rquote s weapons are as ridiculous to the unnatural forces that control the universe as an ant wielding a pebble is to the bulldozer razing the field the ant hill stands in. Combat rarely resolves any unnatural threat.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.1\tab The Turn\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Combat is measured in \i turns\i0 . A turn is a few seconds, or as long as it takes everyone to complete a single action.\par
The Game Moderator counts down by DEX for all characters, from highest to lowest. Each character acts when his or her number comes up. If DEX scores tie, the actions occur at the same time or the Game Moderator can choose some tiebreaker.\par
During a turn, a combatant can attempt \i one \i0 of the following actions.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.1\tab Aim\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Sacrifice one turn to aim and gain a +20% to your attack next turn. Aiming requires no roll. After the next turn, or if your Protagonist suffers any damage before attempting it, the bonus is lost.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.2\tab Attack\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An \ldblquote attack\rdblquote  encompasses anything from throwing a punch to \lang3081 firing a Trebuchet\lang1033 . The \ldblquote standard\rdblquote  attack (ranged or hand-to-hand) is a skill test to see if your Protagonist hits a target; damage is inflicted based on the weapon used. \par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 Use \b Ranged Weapons\b0  for aimed weapons (e.g., bow or crossbow);\lang1033\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Use\b  Athletics\b0  for a thrown weapon;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Use \b Melee Weapons\b0  for a hand-to-hand weapon;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Use \b Unarmed Combat\b0  for a punch or kick.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081 The number of shots fired in a single ranged weapon attack may depend on the weapon used \emdash  e.g., a  skilled archer might fire two arrows at once from a longbow \emdash  but it\rquote s always a single attack roll and a single damage roll.\lang1033\par
\pard Attacking with unarmed combat or a melee weapon (but not with weapon which acts at a distance) also means your Protagonist is parrying and blocking. See \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.3\tab Called Shot\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A called shot is an attack to a particular body part (the head, the hand, the leg). \par
\lang3081 A called shot allows your Protagonist to fire an arrow through a narrow opening, or to shoot someone in the leg and avoid body armor.\lang1033\par
A called shot is more difficult than a standard attack, so it has a penalty:\par
\b PARTLY COVERED (\u8722?20%):\b0  The target is partially covered (half the body).\par
\b MOSTLY COVERED (\u8722?40%):\b0  The target is mostly covered (all but a limb or head).\par
\pard Making a called shot with unarmed combat or a melee weapon (but not with weapon which acts at a distance) also means your Protagonist is parrying and blocking. See \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.4\tab Disarm\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An attempt to knock an object from the target\rquote s grasp using the Unarmed Combat skill. This is possible only if your Protagonist has both hands free and is in hand-to-hand range. If your roll succeeds, the target drops the object.\par
\pard Attempting to disarm also means your Protagonist is parrying and blocking. See \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.5\tab Dodge\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 This is a \b Dodge\b0  skill test to get out of the way of an attack (or a disarm or pin). This opposed test pits your Protagonist\rquote s Dodge skill against the attack roll. If your roll overcomes the attack roll, your Protagonist avoids harm. See \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details. If the Game Moderator agrees, a Protagonist can dodge while jogging or running as described in the \b MOVE\b0  action below.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.6\tab Escape\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 A roll to escape a pin. Roll either \b STR\'d75\b0  or \b Unarmed Combat\b0 , whichever is better. This acts as a defense roll against the character pinning your Protagonist (see \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details); it\rquote s opposed by the pinning character\rquote s attack roll against your Protagonist. If the pinning character is not attacking, the escape is opposed by either \b Unarmed Combat\b0  or \b STR\'d75\b0  (whichever is better). If the escape roll succeeds, your Protagonist is no longer pinned \emdash  and the escape roll defends against other attacks until your Protagonist\rquote s next action. If it fails, your Protagonist remains pinned and cannot defend against attacks.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.7\tab Fight Back\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 If someone attacks your Protagonist with a melee weapon or unarmed combat (not a weapon acting at a distance or an explosive), your Protagonist can fight back with \b Unarmed Combat\b0  or \b Melee Weapons\b0  to block and counterattack. See \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.8\tab Move\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An action that moves your Protagonist a significant distance: 10 yards jogging, 20 yards running, or 30 yards sprinting (or you can move about 3 yards while performing some other action).\par
Usually moving requires no roll, but if Protagonists are running or sprinting, players may need to make a \b DEX\'d75\b0  test to keep their footing. Fail, and your Protagonist falls prone and must spend a turn recovering.\par
\pard If there\rquote s cover at the end of your Protagonist\rquote s movement, getting behind it provides protection (see \b PROTECTION IN COMBAT\b0  on page \lang3081 56\lang1033 ). This can give your Protagonist armor against ranged weapons and explosives \emdash  if the Protagonist is behind cover when the attack happens.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.9\tab Pin\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An attempt to immobilize a target, either on the ground or up against something, using \b Unarmed Combat\b0 . This is possible only if your Protagonist has both hands free and is in hand-to-hand range. If it succeeds, the target is pinned. \par
\i All \i0 unarmed or melee weapon attacks against a pinned target are at a +20% bonus. A Protagonist pinning a target can attack the pinned target in later turns.\par
A pinned target can attempt escape once per turn (see the \b ESCAPE\b0  action, above) but nothing else.\par
\pard Attempting to pin a target also means your Protagonist is parrying and blocking. See \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033  for details.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.10\tab Wait\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Protagonists can choose to wait to take any action after their DEX order comes up. At any time before your next turn, you can insert your Protagonist\rquote s action before the next action in DEX order. Your Protagonist can\rquote t wait until another character acts and then jump in before it\rquote s resolved, but your Protagonist can jump in before the other character\rquote s turn comes up.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.1.11\tab Anything Else\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Drink a vial full of a glowing liquid, throw open an unlocked door, activate a mechanism, grab a rope, pick something up, stand up from a prone position \emdash  anything that takes a moment\rquote s concentration. The Game Moderator decides whether it requires a stat or skill test.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> One Action Per Turn\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl A Protagonist can take only one action per turn. In some settings, there might exist advanced weapons which may hit multiple targets, or one target multiple times, with a single roll (see \b LETHALITY RATING\b0  on page \lang3081 54\lang1033 ), but it\rquote s still just one action per turn. If this seems counterintuitive (\ldblquote a good brawler can throw three jabs a second!\rdblquote ) don\rquote t think of every roll as a single action but as a few seconds of fighting or moving.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.2\tab Attack Rolls\f1\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\fs22 An attack is a skill roll which inflicts damage, disarms or pins the target, depending on the attacker\rquote s action.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.2.1\tab Critical Hits and Fumbles\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 An attack roll that\rquote s a critical success (see page \lang3081 43\lang1033 ) is a \i critical hit\i0 . A critical hit inflicts double damage.\par
An attack roll that \i fumbles \i0 (see page \lang3081 43\lang1033 ) is bad news. The exact outcome remains up to the Game Moderator and can include:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 1.\tab A weapon malfunctions in some way, requiring 1D4 turns to fix\par
2.\tab A weapon drops and it takes a turn to pick it back up.\par
3.\tab The attacker accidentally hits a friend, a bystander, or himself / herself.\par
4.\tab The attacker stumbles and falls.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.2.2\tab Attack Modifiers\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 When you make an attack roll, it means the situation is out of control. Combat is chaotic and unpredictable even for the most highly trained fighters. The combatants\rquote  skill ratings and the luck of the dice usually tell everything you need to know.\par
Bonuses and penalties in combat apply only in extraordinary circumstances. The \b COMBAT MODIFIERS\b0  table, nearby, lists the likeliest modifiers. If they do apply, Attack bonuses stack up to a maximum +40%. There\rquote s no limit on penalties.\par
No matter the bonus or penalty, a roll of 01 always hits and a roll of 00 (100) always misses.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl >> Optional Rules: Other Critical Hits\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\sl276\slmult1 If the Game Moderator agrees, a critical hit can inflict normal damage (not double) and have some \i additional\i0  effect: STUN or DISARM the target; knock the target PRONE; make the hit a CALLED SHOT; or allow the attacker to immediately roll a SECOND ATTACK.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.2.3\tab Surprise Attacks\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If your Protagonist is out to kill someone who\rquote s unaware or helpless (and nobody is trying to stop you), that\rquote s hardly combat. You may not even need to make a roll.\par
\b TARGET IS TOTALLY HELPLESS \emdash  BOUND OR ASLEEP:\b0  No roll is needed to murder the target in one turn.\par
\b TARGET IS ACTIVE BUT UNAWARE AND COMBAT HAS NOT YET BEGUN:\b0  Make an attack roll at +20%. Any success is a critical hit. If it fails, the attack misses. Maybe your Protagonist flinched at the last instant or maybe the target moved. Work out the details with the Game Moderator.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.2.4\tab Firing Into A Crowd\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Use a \caps called shot\caps0  to hit a particular target in a crowd with a ranged attack. Otherwise a random member of the crowd takes the hit.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Combat Modifiers\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Circumstance\cell +20% Bonus\cell -20% Penalty\cell -40% Penalty\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\fs20 Very Long or Very Short Range\par
\cell Firing at point-blank range (3 yards or less)\par
\cell Beyond base range (up to 2\'d7)\par
\cell Beyond 2\'d7 base range (up to 5\'d7)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Unusual Target Concealment or Visibility\par
\cell Using a sight to line up a ranged attack\cell Terrible visibility due to smoke or darkness\par
\cell Little to no visibility\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Called Shot or Area Attack \par
\cell Explosive weapon\cell Target about half covered or smaller than a human body\cell Target mostly covered or very small\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Unusual Target Condition \emdash Ranged Attack\par
\cell Target standing totally still\cell Target prone or running\cell Target moving very fast \par
\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Unusual Target Condition \emdash Melee Attack\par
\cell Target pinned down or standing totally still\par
\cell Target moving quickly (e.g., running)\cell Target moving very fast \par
\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2675\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5345\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8016\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Unusual Attacker Condition \par
\cell Carefully aiming for a full turn\par
\cell Suffering from an irritant; exhausted\par
\cell Suffering from corrosive gas; stunned\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.3\tab Defense Rolls\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Dodging and hand-to-hand combat (with unarmed or with melee weapons) are tests that protect your Protagonist by opposing an attack roll.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.3.1\tab Dodging and Fighting Back\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist can Dodge or fight back against an incoming attack even before your Protagonist\rquote s DEX order in a turn. If you do this, it becomes your Protagonist\rquote s single action for that turn. A Protagonist who has already taken another action that turn can\rquote t Dodge or fight back until the next turn.\par
A roll to Dodge opposes \i all \i0 hand-to-hand attacks that turn. It lets your Protagonist duck behind cover to evade all ranged attacks that turn if cover is near. Dodging never inflicts damage.\par
\lang3081 Fighting back blocks not only the current hand-to-hand attack, but may also deflect (or parry) later hand-to-hand attacks in the same turn, albeit at some potential risk (see below).\lang1033  If you win the contest, you take no damage. It does not protect you against ranged attacks unless you\rquote re close enough to push the ranged weapon away. As part of your fighting back roll, choose one offensive action \endash  \b\caps attack, called shot, disarm,\b0\caps0  or \b\caps pin \b0\endash  \caps0 against a single attacker. If your roll beats that attacker\rquote s roll, your Protagonist takes no damage and your Protagonist\rquote s action affects the attacker.\par
In order to Dodge or fight back, your Protagonist must know an attack is coming and be physically able to block or evade it. If your Protagonist is pinned, if the attack occurs before he or she realizes it, or if your Protagonist can\rquote t see or hear the attacker, your Protagonist can\rquote t Dodge or fight back.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.3.2\tab Dodging Ranged Attacks\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An ordinary Dodge roll can avoid a slow-moving ranged attack, such as an arrow or a thrown weapon. \par
\lang3081 If your Protagonist is aware that such an attack is imminent, and they are standing close to an appropriate source of cover, make a Dodge roll for the Protagonist to scramble behind that cover before the attack. If there\rquote s no cover, Dodging does no good.\lang1033\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.3.3\tab Defending After Attacking\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 When your turn comes up, declare your Protagonist\rquote s action \caps\emdash\b  attack, called shot, disarm, or pin\b0\caps0  \emdash  and make the roll. Your Protagonist can harm, disarm or pin only one target per turn (the attack might hurt others, but all attacks have a single target).\par
A successful roll to attack, disarm, pin, or make a called shot can be re-used later in the same turn to oppose subsequent \b Unarmed Combat\b0  and \b Melee Weapons\b0  attacks against your Protagonist. This is called parrying, and carries a certain level of risk. When an attacker declares such an attack against your Protagonist \endash  but before any dice have been rolled \endash  you can elect to parry the attack. The alternative is to simply choose to allow the attack to continue unopposed. If you decide to parry, the attacker makes their skill test and it is compared in an opposed test against your Protagonist\rquote s dice roll from earlier in the turn (either a direct attack/pin/called-shot or a Fight Back). \par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If your Protagonist\rquote s result is superior to the new attacker\rquote s result, then the attack has been fully deflected and neutralized \endash  no harm is done to your Protagonist. \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 However, if the attacker\rquote s roll achieved a better result in the opposed test, not only does your Protagonist take damage from the attack, but he or she \b also\b0  \b loses 1WP\b0 . This \lang3081 represents the cumulative mental toll of parrying \endash  tracking, predicting, and reacting to multiple opponents who want to do the character bodily harm.\lang1033\par
\pard If your Protagonist is carrying a shield at the time of the attack, the act of parrying (re-using a previous attack roll) is much less risky from a WP perspective. Each shield type has an associated number of \ldblquote free parry\rdblquote  actions (see the table on page \lang3081 57\lang1033 ). While utilizing such a defensive item, your Protagonist can parry up to the stated number of times in the turn \i without\i0  risking loss of a WP \endash  success in such parry attempts deflects harm, failure results in normal HP damage but no loss of WP. Considering the relatively small number of WPs most Protagonist\rquote s possess, the slow rate and which they refresh, and the possibility that extended melee combat may lead to an accumulation of significant parry-related exhaustion, shields represent a significant tactical advantage.\par
To parry an attack, your Protagonist must know the attack is coming. That requires seeing or hearing the attacker. The Protagonist must \i also \i0 be physically able to block the attack, if it is melee. A pinned Protagonist can\rquote t defend, nor can a Protagonist who has already successfully pinned a target.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 An attack roll with a ranged weapon does not oppose attack rolls against your Protagonist.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.4\tab Damage\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Combat is about inflicting damage. Each weapon or attack has a damage rating measured in dice. When an attack hits, roll the weapon\rquote s damage dice and subtract the result from the target\rquote s Hit Points.\par
\b DAMAGE BONUS:\b0  High or low Strength modifies the damage of unarmed and hand-to-hand attacks, to a minimum of 0:\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Damage Bonus from STR Score\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2141\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4277\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6413\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl 1\emdash 4\cell 5\emdash 8\cell 9\emdash 12\cell 13\emdash 16\cell 17\emdash 18\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2141\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4277\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6413\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl -2\cell -1\cell 0\cell +1\cell +2\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\b STUN:\b0  Stun attacks startle and impair. While stunned, your Protagonist can\rquote t act. When it\rquote s your Protagonist\rquote s turn, you may attempt a \b CON\'d75\b0  test to recover and act normally next turn. If a single attack inflicts half of your Protagonist\rquote s \i current \i0 HP, the Protagonist is automatically stunned.\par
\b UNCONSCIOUSNESS:\b0  If your Protagonist is reduced to 2 or fewer HP, he or she falls unconscious. An unconscious Protagonist is helpless and can be killed with a single attack without having to roll. At 3 HP or more (or after an hour passes), the Protagonist regains consciousness.\par
\b PERMANENT INJURY:\b0  Any time your Protagonist is reduced to 2 or fewer HP, make a \b CON\'d75\b0  test. Failure indicates permanent injury. The Game Moderator selects a stat to be \i permanently \i0 reduced by the number on the \i lowest ten-sided die of the failed CON\'d75 \i0 roll. Stats can only be reduced in this way to a minimum score of 3. If STR or CON drop, adjust HP accordingly.\par
\b DEATH:\b0  If an attack brings your Protagonist to 0 HP, he or she is dead. HP do not go below 0.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl >> Optional Rules: Other Permanent Injuries\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\sl264\slmult1 At the Game Moderator\rquote s discretion, a permanent injury may have some effect other than stat loss: a permanent penalty that can\rquote t be corrected with surgery. Usually it\rquote s a \u8722?20% penalty that applies in certain circumstances. Here are some possibilities.\par
\b PARTIALLY BLINDED:\b0  The Protagonist suffers a \u8722?20% penalty to all tests requiring good eyesight.\par
\b PARTIALLY DEAFENED:\b0  The Protagonist suffers a \u8722?20% penalty to all tests requiring good hearing.\par
\b ARM CRIPPLED OR SEVERED:\b0  The Protagonist suffers a \u8722?20% penalty to all tests requiring two hands.\par
\b LEG CRIPPLED OR SEVERED:\b0  The Protagonist suffers a \u8722?20% penalty to all tests requiring movement.\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.4.1\tab Healing\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 There are four types of healing: \i Resuscitation, Stabilization, Treatment, \i0 and \i Recuperation\i0 .\par
\b RESUSCITATION:\b0  Sometimes it\rquote s possible to resuscitate a dead character. If the Game Moderator says resuscitation is possible, someone must make a \b First Aid\b0  test. This must occur within a number of minutes after death equal to the victim\rquote s CON score. If it succeeds, it restores 1D4 HP (doubled for a critical success) and allows the patient to recover. If First Aid fails, the victim dies and may not be resuscitated.\par
\b STABILIZATION:\b0  Stabilizing a wounded character with a successful \b First Aid\b0  test immediately heals 1D4 HP. A critical success doubles the amount healed; a fumble \i inflicts \i0 1D4 damage. Once your Protagonist receives first aid, success or failure, the Protagonist can\rquote t benefit from it again until he or she suffers damage again.\par
\b TREATMENT:\b0  Treatment is professional care in a clean, calm location with extensive tools and healing supplies. \par
\lang3081 A surgeon can attempt a Chirurgery or Herb Lore test once per week: Chirurgery for critical care of severe wounds; Herb Lore for poison, disease, and ongoing healing. If treatment succeeds, the patient recovers 1D4 HP. This is doubled with a critical, while a fumble inflicts 1D4 HP damage. At the Game Moderator\rquote s discretion, having worn-out tools or poor quality medicines may incur a penalty.\lang1033\par
\b RECUPERATION:\b0  Over time, the human body repairs itself. A patient who rests in a safe place with proper food and water can attempt a \b CON\'d75\b0  test once per day to recover 1 HP (in addition to any HP recovered due to medical treatment). On a critical success, the patient regains 1D4; on a fumble, the patient loses 1 HP.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.4.2\tab Complications\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 After treatment, and until the patient heals all lost Hit Points, undertaking strenuous activity (any physical stat or skill test) inflicts 1D4 HP damage as sutures rip, broken bones shift, or fever sets in.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.4.3\tab Recovering Stat Points\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Unless the Game Moderator says otherwise, temporarily lost stat points are restored at 1 point per day.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.5\tab Table of Example Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1\fs22 The tables below summarize some representative weapons and vehicles that characters might have access to. Note that while the concept of LETHAL DAMAGE still exists, it is primarily applied to explosives, poisons, or siege weapons (like ballistae, catapults, trebuchets, and mangonels).\par
Targeting and firing siege weapons uses the \b Siege Weapons\b0  skill. Thrown weapons use \b Athletics\b0  as a combat skill.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Melee Weapons\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Sample Weapons\cell Damage\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl\fs20 Bare hands and feet \cell 1D4\endash 1*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Brass knuckles, knife, or cosh \cell 1D4*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Dagger or hatchet \cell 1D4 +1*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Axe, javelin, or short spear\cell 1D6+1*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Short sword, seax, scimitar, etc\cell 1D6+2*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Mace, heavy hammer, other crushing weapons\cell 1D8*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Broad sword or long spear \cell 1D8+1*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\pard\intbl Two-handed sword or polearm\cell 2D6*\cell\row\pard\sa360\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22 *Damage bonus is added for this weapon\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Ranged Weapons\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Sample Weapons\cell Skill\cell Damage\cell Base Range\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl\fs20 Sling\cell Ranged Weapons\cell 1D4\cell 30 yards\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Bow and arrow \cell Ranged Weapons\cell 1D8\cell 150 yards\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Crossbow\cell Ranged Weapons\cell 1D10\cell 200 yards\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Thrown Knife\cell Athletics\cell 1D4*\cell STR\'d75 feet\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Thrown Spear, Short\cell Athletics\cell 1D6+1*\cell STR\'d75 yards\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4791\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Thrown Spear, Long\cell Athletics\cell 1D8+1*\cell STR\'d72 yards\cell\row\pard\sa360\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22 *Damage bonus is added for this weapon\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Thermal Weapons\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2694\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4395\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Sample Weapons\cell Placement Skill\cell Damage\cell Base Range\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2694\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4395\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl\fs20 Oil or Sulphur soaked cloth\cell Athletics\cell 2D6\cell 2 yards\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2694\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4395\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5925\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8931\pard\intbl Ceramic Grenade\cell Athletics\cell Lethality 10%\cell 5 yards\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Siege Weapons\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl Sample Weapons\cell Damage\cell Kill Zone\cell Rate of Fire\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl\fs20 Ballista\cell LETHALITY 12% [Armor Piercing 3]\cell 1 yard\cell 1 shot per 6 turns\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl 50 pound load\cell LETHALITY 16% [Armor Piercing 5]\cell 1 yard\cell N/A\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl 100 pound load\cell LETHALITY 20% [Armor Piercing 8]\cell 1 yard\cell N/A\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl Battering Ram\cell LETHALITY 10%\cell\'bd yard\cell 1 attack per 4 turns\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl Catapult\cell Depends on load\cell N/A\cell 1 attack per 10 turns\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2913\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4750\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6659\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx9355\pard\intbl Trebuchet\cell Depends on load\cell N/A\cell 1 attack per 14 turns\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0\fs26 4.6\tab Lethality Rating\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Certain attacks inflict damage well beyond the possibility of survival\lang3081 ; a 100-pound load from a siege weapon makes fast work of human anatomy\lang1033 . Rather than rolling many dice for damage or many separate attacks, a weapon like this has a Lethality rating.\par
If an attack hits with a weapon that has a Lethality rating, there\rquote s a chance it simply kills the target outright. Instead of rolling normal damage, roll percentile dice against the weapon\rquote s Lethality rating. If the Lethality test succeeds, a human target immediately drops to 0 HP. If the Lethality test fails, add the two dice together as if they were individual D10s (0 is 10) and apply \i that \i0 as HP damage.\par
Lethality rolls do not fumble or critically succeed, but the attack roll can. If the attack roll is a critical success, double the Lethality rating, and double the HP damage if the Lethality roll fails.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.6.1\tab Kill Radius\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Some types of especially destructive effects destroy not just one target but spread across an entire (usually circular) zone \endash  the size of the effect is measured by Kill Radius.\par
If a weapon has a Kill Radius, a successful attack inflicts a Lethality roll on each character inside that radius. The center of the Kill Radius is the initial target of the attack.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Why Lethality Ratings?\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\sl276\slmult1 The Lethality rating replaces the need to roll lots of separate attacks and lots of dice for damage. Without it, a massively damaging attack might require several separate attacks and damage rolls to afflict many different targets. In the middle of combat, rolling that much breaks the tension. \par
If you\rquote d rather roll damage the old way, it\rquote s 1D6 damage for every 3% of Lethality. So a weapon with 35% would do 12D6 HP damage.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
With explosive weapons, Kill Radius attacks don\rquote t need to be as precise as ordinary attacks; hitting a zone within the Kill Radius of a target is enough. That adds +20% to the chance to hit.\par
A failed attack roll means the Kill Radius lands harmlessly outside the intended area. The attack does no harm\emdash but may still suppress targets (see \b SUPPRESSION\b0 , below). Whether a failed Kill Radius attack does unwanted collateral damage is up to the Game Moderator.\par
\b MANY TARGETS:\b0  A single attack with a Kill Radius usually affects everyone in the Kill Radius. If that doesn\rquote t make sense for the situation, the Game Moderator can decide who gets hit.\par
The Game Moderator is welcome to let players roll the Lethality results for NPCs to speed things up. But really, you need to roll Lethality only for characters who are important enough to track in detail. Since even a failed Lethality roll inflicts between 2 and 20 damage, it\rquote s safe to just assume that most humans caught in a Kill Radius are either dead or incapacitated.\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.7\tab Explosions\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 If your Protagonist wants to disable or destroy a structure or vehicle, an explosive or other form of Lethal attack might be their best bet. Such large objects have their own Hit Points (see \b VEHICLES,\b0  page \lang3081 68\lang1033 ), and they are considered huge targets (see \b HUGE\b0 , page \lang3081 58\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081 For example, if your Protagonist wanted to gain entry into the abbey's sanctum, he or she might try setting a ceramic grenade beside its door. The GM might rule that the thick door has 12HP and an Armor rating of 5. Assuming the grenade is lobbed (Athletics test) such that the door is within its kill radius (5 yards), when it goes off the door will take damage. Because the object is treated like a HUGE target, the normal Lethality 10% damage is translated into an automatic 10 HP damage reduced by Armor down to 5 HP. So, while the explosion makes a lot of noise, the door is less than half broken down. Time to get another grenade or two.\lang1033\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.8\tab Fear in Combat\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Being involved in combat is inherently frightening for most people. However, certain types of attacks which devastate an entire area are especially terror-inducing. When faced with such destruction \endash  whether from a mundane weapon (e.g., \lang3081 a barrage from a bank of ballistae\lang1033 ) or something supernatural \endash  primal instinct kicks in to prevent a person from placing themselves in mortal peril.\par
The GM can nominate that any massively damaging attack is \b Terror-Inducing.\b0  Any character who knowingly seeks to enter a region targeted by such an attack will hesitate and go to ground \endash  \i even if the attack does not succeed\i0 . The only way to stifle this primal terror is by voluntarily sacrificing 1 SAN.\par
The types of attacks which might be ruled Terror-Inducing include:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Attacks (mundane or supernatural) that inflict Lethal Damage to a Kill Zone,\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Attacks which have previously been witnessed to inflict Unnatural effects worthy of a SAN test,\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Anything else the GM believes would strike extreme fear into combatants.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Note that these effects do not apply to a combatant who is not aware that he or she is straying into an area targeted by the Terror-Inducing attack \endash  when in doubt, call for an \b Alertness\b0  test.\par
\pard A character adapted to violence (see \b ADAPTING TO SAN LOSS\b0  on page \lang3081 77\lang1033 ) loses no SAN for braving a Terror-Inducing attack. For NPCs, it\rquote s easiest to assume the average human goes to ground when faced with such attacks. Only insane, hardened, or fanatical enemies stand up to such intense fear.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Optional Rule: Creating Terror Through Concentrated Fire\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Normally, mundane ranged weapons won\rquote t be damaging enough to inspire terror. What if several combatants team up to concentrate simultaneous shots \endash  none of which themselves are Terror-Inducing \endash  on a single point? In such a case the GM might decide that the combined effect is sufficient to create 1 yard-radius circular zone centered on the point of concentrated fire. All combatants firing at the spot make an attack roll \endash  if the majority succeed, no damage is inflicted but the designated zone is treated as Terror-Inducing. If one or more of the attackers scored a critical on their roll, a random target in the zone is hit for normal damage \i and\i0  everyone else in the zone is affected by the Terror effect. If fewer than half of the attackers succeeded on their rolls, no damage is inflicted \i and\i0  no terror is generated.\par
\pard\intbl\sl276\slmult1 As a rule of thumb, for a concentration of smaller attacks to be ruled as creating a Terror-Inducing effect the sum of their individual maximum damages should be at least 30HP (i.e., three attacks each delivering 1D10 or five attacks each delivering 1D6). Any coordination of two or more attacks with Lethal effects would also qualify.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.9\tab Protection in Combat\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 We\rquote ve seen how to injure, kill, and dismember targets, but how do you protect them?\par
There are five stages of protection, categories that determine how easy a Protagonist or other creature is to harm, regardless of their ability to get out of the way.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.9.1\tab Fragile\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\i\f1 Fragile \i0 targets drop to 0 HP instantly if they suffer \i any \i0 damage from a deliberate attempt to injure them. A helpless human is Fragile and may, at the Game Moderator\rquote s discretion, be reduced to 0 HP with one attack without bothering to roll damage.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.9.2\tab Exposed\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\i\f1 Exposed \i0 is the default for humans and many creatures. It means the target is aware of danger and trying to avoid it, but doesn\rquote t have any real protection. Attacks operate normally against Exposed targets.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.9.3\tab Armored\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Being \i Armored \i0 reduces the damage of attacks. Armor has an Armor rating which reduces the HP damage of attacks. Armor 5 means reduce damage by 5.\par
Armor comes in two forms: \i body armor \i0 and \i cover\i0 . They both reduce the damage of ordinary attacks, but have different effects on Lethality attacks. If you have more than one source of armor (such as wearing body armor while behind a wall), add them all together.\par
\pard Some weapons are armor piercing, which in turn reduces armor (see \b ARMOR PIERCING WEAPONS\b0 , page \lang3081 58\lang1033 ). Furthermore, damage arising from wholly supernatural effects (e.g., mystical energy or psychic attacks by Mythos entities, or damage generated through rituals) completely ignores all armor. In cases where it isn\rquote t clear whether traditional armor should protect against damage dealt through otherworldly means, it is the GM\rquote s call. \par
\b BODY ARMOR:\b0  Body armor reduces the damage of an ordinary attack by its Armor Rating. Body armor protects against the damage of a failed Lethality roll, but does nothing whatsoever against a \i successful \i0 Lethality roll.\par
\b COVER:\b0  Finding cover means using a hard barrier as armor against attack. Cover protects more completely than body armor. If you have cover against a Lethality attack, the Lethality roll automatically fails, but still inflicts the sum of the dice as damage. Subtract the cover\rquote s Armor rating from that damage.\par
What if your Protagonists are completely enclosed in a structure or conveyance? That\rquote s definitely cover, but it\rquote s the Game Moderator\rquote s call. Maybe they take damage reduced by the cover, or maybe they take no damage until the cover is breached.\par
Being behind cover does not make Protagonists immune to the terror of combat (see \b FEAR IN COMBAT\b0  on page \lang3081 56\lang1033 ). If your Protagonist is terrorized, his or her next action must be to hide behind that cover instead of attacking.\par
\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Armor\cell Armor Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl\fs20 Heavy cloth, winter clothes\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Hardened leather, ring mail\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Scale mail\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Wooden wall, palisade, or thick door; a ship\rquote s hull\cell 5\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Chain mail\cell 6\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Thick stone/brick wall or moderate rock\cell 10 \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh287\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5346\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6917\pard\intbl Reinforced stone/brick wall, big rock, or sandbag\cell 15\cell\row\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1560\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\pard\intbl\lang1033 Shield Type\cell # Free Parries\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1560\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\pard\intbl\fs20 Buckler\cell 1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1560\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\pard\intbl Round\cell 2\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1560\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\pard\intbl Heater\cell 3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1560\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3119\pard\intbl Kite\cell 4\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 4.9.4\tab Huge\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A huge target loses Hit Points from ordinary weapon damage as usual. But Lethality ratings don\rquote t affect huge creatures in the same way they do a human sized target. Instead, the Lethality attack does flat HP damage equal to the Lethality rating.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.9.5\tab Transcendent\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Transcendent entities are immune to physical damage. This might mean they exist partly in dimensions we barely perceive, or are so organized that mere excesses of force and matter cannot harm them. \par
Nothing of this Earth is Transcendent. Only through the use of unnatural techniques, under extremely dangerous and limited situations, can humans become Transcendent.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl >> Combat Protection Summary\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2626\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7848\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs20 Target Status\cell Effect of Normal Damage\cell Effect of Lethality Success\cell Effect of Lethality Failure\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2626\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7848\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Fragile \cell Reduced to 0 HP\cell Reduced to 0 HP\cell Reduced to 0 HP\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2626\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7848\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Exposed \cell Roll HP damage. If Armored, subtract the Armor value from the damage.\par
\cell Reduced to 0 HP\cell Add up the Lethality dice to determine HP damage. If Armored, subtract the Armor value from the damage\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2626\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7848\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Behind cover\cell Roll HP damage. Subtract the cover\rquote s Armor value from the damage.\cell Add up the Lethality dice to determine HP damage. Subtract the cover\rquote s Armor value from the damage.\cell Add up the Lethality dice to determine HP damage. Subtract the cover\rquote s Armor value from the damage.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2626\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7848\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Huge \cell Roll HP damage. If Armored, subtract the Armor value from the damage.\cell Take the Lethality rating as HP damage. If Armored, subtract the Armor value from the damage. \cell Take the Lethality rating as HP damage. If Armored, subtract the Armor value from the damage.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2626\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7848\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Transcendent \cell No damage\cell No damage\cell No damage\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs22\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.9.6\tab Armor Piercing Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 An armor piercing weapon reduces the Armor value of a target by a number of points. If the weapon description notes it as armor-piercing it will normally also specify the reduction \endash  if no number is given, assume the attack reduces effective armor by 5.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.10\tab Optional Spot Rules for Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1\fs22 There\rquote s a fair amount of variety in weaponry available during this era. Their usefulness in adventures may be limited, of course, depending on who or what the Protagonists face.\par
\pard The primary game statistics relating to different types of weapons may be found on the Example Weapons Table on page 54. The availability of any class of weapon will be dictated by the scarcity of weapon resources in the particular game setting (see preceding section). There are a wide variety of weapon variations throughout the Medieval era depending on culture and purpose. \par
What follows are some spot rules for Protagonists who have access to common Medieval Era weapons.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 4.10.1\tab Concealing Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1 Knives and daggers can be concealed under ordinary clothing. Someone deliberately looking for a concealed weapon can attempt an \b Alertness\b0  test to spot it. A short sword or club means a +20% Alertness bonus.\par
If a Protagonist is wearing a heavy coat or cloak, they can attempt to conceal items like broadswords or axes and incur no Alertness bonus.\par
There\rquote s no way to conceal a large melee weapon.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 4.10.2\tab Hand-to-Hand Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1 Unarmed attacks, like punching, kicking, and strangling, use the \b Unarmed\b0  Combat skill. All melee weapons use the \b Melee Weapons\b0  skill.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 4.10.3\tab Ranged Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1 Ranged weapons that are aimed (e.g., crossbows, bow, and slings) use the \b Ranged Weapons\b0  skill. All require some kind of ammunition (arrows, bolts) and are useless if the supply is exhausted. Primitive weapons that are thrown (e.g., spears) use \b Athletics\b0  skill.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 4.10.4\tab Fighting on Horseback\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1 If a combatant on horseback attacks an enemy who is on foot, the height advantage of the attacker affords an advantage. All such attacks are made at +20%. Similarly, attempts made by mounted combatants to dodge or fight back against attackers on foot receive a bonus of +20%. These bonuses only apply if there is a significant height advantage (and don\rquote t apply when a rider is attacking something much larger than human-sized).\par
Note that whenever fighting from horseback, a combatant\rquote s effective combat skill is the \ul lesser\ulnone  of their \b Ride\b0  skill and their normal relevant combat skill.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.10.5\tab Siege Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Many unnatural things that Protagonists face are inscrutable perversions of physics no more vulnerable to explosions than they are to crucifixes. This never stops Protagonists from trying.\par
The most damaging weapons available in the Medieval Era are the siege weapons that are used to fight land wars and besiege castles and cities. These are all weighty weapons that require an entire team of skilled persons to operate and take considerable time to place and move. Siege Weapons take a long time to load and fire. \par
Most catapults and trebuchets can fire whatever will fit into their basket. Rocks, weapons, incendiary materials, even corpses have all been flung in the general direction of the enemy. \par
During most engagements, siege engines are built on the spot using available timber. The manpower and expense to move them from battlefield to battlefield isn\rquote t cost effective.\par
\pard As shown in the Table of Example Weapons (page 54), the rate of fire for ordnance is low; preparing even a small weapon takes 5 or more combat turns; larger ones can take 10 turns or more to re-load.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Aiming and Firing Siege Weapons\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 The team of people preparing a siege weapon for firing must all work together to position it appropriately and calibrate it to fire in the desired direction. Every person involved must possess some rating in the \b Siege Weapons\b0  skill to usefully contribute to the process. Once the piece is ready, whoever was directing the placement makes a skill test against his or her \b Siege Weapons\b0 . A success means the projectile lands in the desired location; failure means that the weapon fired but the projectile lands somewhere other than the chosen target (the GM should choose where it went or use dice to pick a spot 2D10 yards in random direction from the actual target). A fumble means that the siege weapon misfired in some way \endash  perhaps a piece of the weapon breaks or the load falls far short, striking allies. A critical success does not increase the lethality of the shot but will improve the morale of the crew firing the weapon.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Range of Siege Weapons\par
\pard\cf0\i0\f1 The range of a siege weapon is affected both by its type and load. Game Masters can extrapolate range for heavier loads. This range assumes the load is a solid projectile, such as a single large rock. A m\'e9lange of smaller materials will have half the range for an equivalent weight. But the load will scatter in mid-air causing damage over a wider area \endash  triple the kill zone from the table on page 54.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6804\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Base Range for Ordnance firing Roundshot\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1985\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3686\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Siege Weapon\cell Weight\cell Range\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1985\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3686\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl\fs20 Ballista\cell N/A\cell 300 yds\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1985\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3686\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Catapult\cell 50 lbs\cell 400 yds\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1985\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3686\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Catapult\cell 100 lbs\cell 200 yds\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1985\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3686\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Trebuchet\cell 50 lbs\cell 300 yds\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1985\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3686\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Trebuchet\cell 100 lbs\cell 200 yds\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.10.6\tab Shields and Parrying\par
\pard\cf0\lang1033\b0\f1 Combat in Medieval settings is frequently up-close-and-personal, with opponents going toe-to-toe swinging, stabbing, striking and blocking. As such, the use of defensive measures such as parrying with weapons and blocking attacks with shields is common. Detailed but streamlined rules for handling extended melee fights is built into the basic rules for combat \endash  see \b DEFENSE ROLLS\b0  on page \lang3081 51\lang1033 . Note that lengthy bouts of hand-to-hand combat can be particularly taxing, and combatants may become Exhausted and/or end the fight with severely depleted Willpower Points; this may have affect their later actions.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.11\tab Other Threats\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The world is full of threats, combat isn\rquote t the only thing that can kill a Protagonist.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.11.1\tab Poison and Disease\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Every poison or disease has two ratings: \i Speed \i0 and \i Damage\i0 .\par
\i Speed \i0 indicates how soon the poison or disease inflicts damage. A poison inflicts damage once and then passes from your Protagonist\rquote s system. A disease requires a series of CON tests to resist damage.\par
\i Damage \i0 is ordinary HP for a disease, while poisons have Lethality ratings.\par
\b POISONS:\b0  A poison has a Lethality rating. If the Lethality roll fails, the victim makes a CON\'d75 test to withstand harm. Success means half damage, and a critical success means the victim loses only 1 HP. A fumble doubles the damage. \lquote Hospitalization\rquote  (makeshift or otherwise) grants +20% to the victim\rquote s CON test.\par
\b DISEASES:\b0  Diseases inflict HP damage. If your Protagonist succeeds at a CON\'d75 test, he or she suffers half damage and recovers from the disease. On a failure, he or she suffers full damage and must make the CON\'d75 test again after another Speed interval. A fumbled CON test doubles the damage. While under the effects of a disease, the Protagonist cannot gain Hit Points back. \lquote Hospitalization\rquote  grants a +20% bonus to the CON test. Serious diseases may come with a penalty to the CON test.\par
\par
\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl >> Natural Poisons\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2127\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3500\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5223\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6958\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8718\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Poison\cell Entry Route\cell Speed\cell Lethality\cell Symptoms\cell Antidote?\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2127\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5223\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6958\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8718\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs20 Spider venom \cell Bite\cell 1D6 hours\cell 5%\cell Pain, chills, nausea; possibly necrosis\cell\pard\intbl\sb240\lang3081\fs22 Yes\lang1033\par
\pard\intbl\fs20\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2127\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5223\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6958\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8718\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl dangerous drug administered with failed skill use \cell Varies\cell 1D6 hours\cell 5%\cell Usually pain, diarrhea, convulsions, or asphyxiation\cell\pard\intbl\sb240\lang3081\fs22 Yes\lang1033\par
\fs20\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2127\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5223\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6958\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8718\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Arsenic \cell Ingestion\cell 1D6 hours\cell 10%\cell Pain, diarrhea, cramping\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2127\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5223\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6958\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8718\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Scorpion or rattlesnake venom\cell Bite or sting\cell 1D6 hours\cell 10%\cell Pain, weakness, hemorrhaging, convulsions\cell\pard\intbl\sb240\lang3081\fs22 Yes\lang1033\par
\fs20\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Manufactured & Natural Poisons\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Poison\cell Entry Route\cell Speed\cell Lethality\cell Symptoms\cell Antidote?\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs20 Arsenic\cell Ingestion or inhalation\cell 20+1D10 minutes\cell 4%\cell Convulsions, metallic taste in mouth, cramps\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Belladonna\cell Ingestion\cell 30+1D20 minutes\cell 8%\cell Dilated pupils, low heartrate & pulse, hallucinations\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Cyanide / Laurel\cell Inhalation or Ingestion\cell 1D6 turns\cell 20%\cell Asphyxiation\cell No, but some treatments\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Hemlock\cell Ingestion\cell 30+1D20 minutes\cell 6%\cell Convulsions, muscle pain\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Mercury\cell Ingestion or inhalation\cell 1D10 weeks\cell +1% each major exposure\cell Anxiety, memory problems, numb\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2146\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3517\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5235\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6965\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8722\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Monkshood/Wolfsbane\cell Ingestion\cell 30+1D20 minutes\cell 7%\cell Numbness, nausea, slow heartrate & pulse\cell No\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\lang1033 >> Sample Diseases\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clcbpat8\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Disease\cell Route\cell Speed\cell CON Test Penalty\cell Damage\cell Symptoms\cell Cure\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs20 Ague (Malaria)\cell Insect bite\cell 3D6+10 days\cell None\cell 1D6\cell Fever & chills\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Black Death \cell Flea bite (bubonic plague), inhalation (pneumonic plague)\cell 1D6 days\cell None\cell 1D6\cell Fever, chills, lymph node swelling, coughing (if pneumonic), shock\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Bloody Flux (Dysentery)\cell Bad hygiene, bad water\cell 1D6 weeks\cell None\cell 1D3\cell Diarrhea and bleeding \cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Consumption\cell Inhaling cough droplets\cell 1D6 days\cell None\cell 1D4\cell Persistent cough, night sweats\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Diphtheria\cell Airborne\cell 1D6 days\cell None\cell 1D4\cell Breathing problems, fever\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Jaundice\cell Virus, parasite, alcoholism\cell 2D4 weeks\cell None\cell 1D3\cell Yellow skin, loss of appetite\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Rickets\cell Malnutrition\cell 1D4 weeks\cell None\cell 1D3\cell Weak bones, lethargy\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl The Small Pox\cell Exposure to infected person\cell 2D6 days\cell\endash 40\cell 1D6\cell Fever, vomiting, ulcers, rashes, scabs\cell No\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1701\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3008\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5964\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7448\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8961\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Typhus\cell Fleas, lice, or mites\cell 1D6+6 days\cell None\cell 1D4\cell Headache, fever, chills\cell No\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\fs22\par
\lang1033\par
\pard\sb240\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Some diseases are persistent. That means that even succeeding at the CON test only buys time; the disease subsides and your Protagonist recovers lost HP. But every time the Protagonist is badly hurt (losing more than half his or her HP) or suffers from some other poison or disease, the Protagonist must make a CON\'d75 test to resist a resurgence.\par
\lang3081\b ANTIDOTES:\b0  In this era very few poisons and diseases can be cured outright with medication. In the rare cases that the GM rules that a physician has a partial antidote for a poison or a helpful drug to treat a disease, a Herb Lore test before the ailment takes effect renders the poison or disease half as damaging. An antidote given after the ailment takes effect is less effective, only reducing the Lethality rating and the HP damage by a quarter.\lang1033\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl >> Damage from Torture\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\sa200\sl276\slmult1 If a Protagonist is beaten, whipped, or subject to another type of physical torture, he or she is required to make a \b CON\'d73\b0  test. The damage accrued from the experience depends on the level of success or failure of this roll:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Critical Success:\b0  1D10 HP damage for the whole session, no matter how brutal.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Success by 20 or more:\b0  1D3 damage for every 50 strikes (or equivalent).\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Regular Success:\b0  Lethality 3% for every 50 strikes (i.e., 3% for 50 strikes, 6% for 100 strikes, and so on).\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Failure:\b0  Lethality 2% for every 20 strikes.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-357\li714\sa200\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Fumble:\b0  1D20+5 HP damage for the torture with\i  \i0 any torture over 50 strikes results in immediate death.\par
\pard\intbl\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Torture also takes a toll on the torturer\rquote s and victim\rquote s mental health. The torturer must make violence-related SAN tests until they\rquote ve become inured to torturing others. \par
In some cases, torture is a form of corporal punishment, meant to do nothing other than confer pain on the victim. Other times, torture is a means to extract information. While the victim may want to stay silent, the pain of torture (or even the promise of torture) can convince the victim to divulge what they know.\par
When the victim wants to resist blabbering everything they know, they must attempt a \b Willpower Points \'d7 3\b0  test. On a success, the victim can say, or not say, whatever they want. For every turn of torture that the victim survives, they lose 1D4 WP in addition to any HP lost. The \b WP\'d73\b0  test must be attempted after any turn of torture.\par
If the WP roll is a fumble, the victim can\rquote t help but tell the entire truth. A regular failure means that the victim must reveal one fact or detail, but they can choose what that is. A torturer who succeeds on an \b Insight\b0  test can tell when the truth is being told, and can choose to continue the torture even after the victim talks.\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.11.2\tab Falling\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Falling is extremely dangerous to humans. Even a bad slip can be lethal. A fall from a short distance (one to three yards) does 1D6 damage, or 2D6 if it\rquote s a particularly uncontrolled fall. Beyond that, a fall instead has a Lethality rating of 1% per yard fallen. A Protagonist who survives a fall must make a \b CON\'d75\b0  test or be \b STUNNED\b0  (see page \lang3081 52\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.11.3\tab Suffocation\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Suffocation is a slow death. If your Protagonist takes a deep breath before holding it, he or she can go without breathing for CON\'d75 turns. After that, your Protagonist\rquote s oxygen-starved brain begins to die. Once every turn, make a \b CON\'d75\b0  test. If it fails, your Protagonist suffers 1D6 HP damage. If the CON test succeeds, your Protagonist suffers 1 HP damage instead. This continues until your Protagonist can breathe again or he or she dies.\par
If your Protagonist doesn\rquote t get a breath before suffocating, the damage starts immediately and lasts until someone clears his or her airway with a \b First Aid\b0  test. Armor does not protect against suffocation damage.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.11.4\tab Fire\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Fire damage suffered depends on the flame\rquote s intensity. The victim suffers a damage roll every turn of exposure.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1035\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5529\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7797\pard\intbl\fs20 Intensity\cell Example\cell Damage\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1035\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5529\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7797\pard\intbl Minor \cell Candle\cell 1/turn\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1035\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5529\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7797\pard\intbl Moderate \cell Flaming brand; momentary exposure to a larger fire\cell 1D6/turn\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1035\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5529\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7797\pard\intbl Large \cell Campfire\cell 2D6/turn\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1035\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5529\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7797\pard\intbl Major \cell Scalding steam; bonfire; furnace\cell Lethality (10%) each turn\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs22\par
After taking damage from any moderate, large or major source of fire, the victim must make a \b DEX\'d75\b0  test or catch fire, suffering half damage each turn until extinguished. Being surrounded by a raging fire also causes suffocation as the fire consumes oxygen. (See \b SUFFOCATION\b0  above.)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.11.5\tab Cold\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Protagonists can last for CON in minutes exposed to freezing temperatures unprepared, or CON\'d75 minutes if partially prepared. Fully prepared and well-equipped Protagonists can last CON hours.\par
After this, their bodies start to fail. Players must make a \b CON\'d75\b0  test every five minutes. Each failure reduces CON by 1. When a Protagonist\rquote s CON hits 1, the Protagonist can no longer move and suffers 1D8 HP cold damage every five minutes. Exposure to warmth and shelter restores 1 point of CON per minute. Hit Points heal normally.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 4.11.6\tab Starvation and Thirst\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Protagonists deprived of food for longer than a week will begin to die of starvation. Each week, make a test against \b CON\'d72\b0  or a relevant Survival skill (whichever is higher), failure leading to a loss of CON. For the first week without nourishment the loss is 1D2, the next week 1D4, then 2D4, 3D4 and so on.\par
Surviving without water is much more difficult. For the first 24 hours without hydration there are no effects, but for each day thereafter the Protagonist must make a test against \b CON\'d72\b0  or a relevant Survival skill (whichever is higher). Failure means a loss of 1D4 STR and 1D4 CON. If a water supply is re\u8208?established these points will return at a rate of 1D2 STR and 1D2 CON each day.\par
If at any point the Protagonist\rquote s STR or CON drops to zero, he or she has died of starvation or thirst.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 4.12\tab The Aftermath\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 When the smoke clears and the fighting stops, it\rquote s time for the Game Moderator to look to the consequences of combat. There are \i always \i0 consequences.\par
\pard First, violence damages sanity. Unless your Protagonist is a hardened operator, getting into a deadly fight calls for a Sanity roll. So does getting hurt. So does killing someone. (See \b THREATS TO SAN\b0  on page \lang3081 70\lang1033 .)\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 Next, was anyone killed or badly hurt? If so \'85 who\rquote s going to come looking for them? \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb360\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 5.0\tab Equipment\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Most equipment that your Protagonist will buy, find or use does not require any special rules \endash  if you have the equipment, and it is in working order then you can use it (possibly with a skill or stat test) to do things. Some items that are poorly made or worn-out may incur a penalty (see the box nearby).\par
Obtaining equipment can be as simple as purchasing it in a store (assuming such commerce exists in the game setting); alternatively, it can involve scrounging around trying to piece together usable items from junk.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 5.1\tab Buying Equipment\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The table below gives some indicative prices for equipment. It also shows the normal range of available financial wealth that is typical for individuals at different strata of society (as defined by the Permanent Resources rating, see\lang3081  \lang1033\b\caps Detailed Description: Resources\b0\caps0 , page \lang3081 22\lang1033 ).\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb120\sa120\cf2\b\f0 What does the Resources Rating Mean?\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\f1 Resources\tab Financial Assets\par
Rating\par
\b0 0 \tab\tab Penury\tab\tab\tab no assets\par
1-4\tab\tab Poor\tab\tab\tab homeless, but one set of good-condition clothes\par
5-8\tab\tab Average\tab\tab small cottage, summer and winter clothes\par
9-12\tab\tab Above Average\tab\tab a house or farm, a tenant laborer; several outfits of good clothes\par
\pard\intbl\fi-1440\li1440 13-16\tab Well Off\tab\tab a good house or farm and a handful of laborer\par
17-18\tab Rich\tab\tab\tab houses in the city and a village in the country; a dozen laborers\par
19\tab Very Rich\tab\tab several villages in the country. Large townhouse in the city or a castle in \tab\tab\tab\tab the country\par
\pard\intbl\fi-1440\li1440\sa120 20+\tab Super Rich\tab\tab among the richest members of society\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 5.2\tab Scrounging\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Some items that the Protagonists want to obtain might not be easy to obtain \endash  either because they are restricted in some way, especially scarce, or illegal. Alternatively, the items might be available, but priced such that the Protagonist simply can\rquote t afford them. In such situations, the only recourse might be to scrounge around to see if the items can be \lquote liberated\rquote  from somewhere. This might involve sifting through discarded items to find pieces that are good enough to function as needed, and perhaps lashing them together to make more complex equipment.\par
If a Protagonist wants to obtain a resource that isn\rquote t available to them via simple means, there are two ways:\par
\pard\fi-360\li765\sa200\sl276\slmult1 1.\tab By rummaging through the stockpile of belongings that constitute his or her personal \lquote resources\rquote , or\par
2.\tab Searching the environment to try to locate an abandoned or unclaimed supply of that resource.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Each of these methods uses a different game mechanic. \par
The former is a use of the Protagonist\rquote s \b Resources\b0  rating, while the latter is a use of his or her \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033\b0  skill.\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1 In both cases, the difficulty of the test to locate a usable item depends on the scarcity of the item being sought, as well as:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 [For rummaging the resource pool]\b0  \endash  whether the item is small enough to realistically be carried around from place to place.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 [For scavenging] \endash\b0  whether the location being searched is a likely or unlikely place for such resources to have been stored or abandoned.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 The results of a test can indicate that an item has been discovered, or describe utter failure of the search/rummaging. However even if the roll is successful there is no guarantee that the resource discovered will be in good condition \endash  the discovered item might be heavily worn or maybe even utter junk (see box nearby).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 Pre-Loved Items and Spoiled Goods\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 >> Junk\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Not all equipment the Protagonists will encounter in the game world are in pristine condition. Indeed, some pieces of equipment they find is damaged, poorly maintained, or just badly made. \par
If your Protagonist is stuck with a junk piece of gear, it fumbles not just on a failed roll with matching numbers, but also on any roll higher than 95.\par
A junk item also incurs a \u8722?20% penalty to every use of it.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Heavily Worn Items\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Some of the items which the Protagonist finds aren\rquote t junk but have seen considerable previous use and be heavily worn out. Items like this work alright but are at the risk of \i becoming\i0  junk every time the Protagonist puts them into service. After each use the Protagonist must make a Luck roll. On failure, the worn item has turned into junk (as per above).\par
It\rquote s up to the Game Moderator exactly when a perfectly normal pristine item has had so much wear-and-tear that it qualifies as being considered Heavily Worn. This should only happen to equipment or devices that have received considerable \lquote on screen\rquote  use, or which were purloined from a source which is likely to have heavily over-used it.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Spoiled and Potentially Dangerous Consumables\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl If the Protagonist is searching for a type of consumable resource (e.g., water, food) and gains a less-than-perfect outcome, it is possible that some quantity of the resource has been found but in a spoiled condition that may be potentially dangerous to use/ingest.\par
\par
The Game Moderator will need to interpret what this means in the context of the resource type, and whether the spoiling is obvious or requires a skill test to detect. \par
\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ingesting spoiled food or water is treated as an exposure to poison (see \b POISON AND DISEASE\b0  on page \lang3081 60\lang1033 ). The default toxicity is (Speed 1D4 hours; Lethality 2%), but the Game Moderator can vary this to fit the situation.\par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 Administering spoiled herbal preparations can be considered as per food and water (if the original medicine was something relatively minor), or as per the failure of a Herb Lore roll during administration of a medicinal poultice (Poison; Speed 1D6 hours; Lethality 5%).\lang1033\par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 Attempting to use other \ldblquote spoiled\rdblquote  consumables (e.g., oil, alchemical ingredients) usually results in them being inert and useless, although the Game Moderator might decide they result in dangerous situations for the users (e.g., unexpected reactions, damage to weapons, vehicles, etc.)\lang1033\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 5.2.1\tab Resource Categories and Scarcity\par
\pard\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 As an abstraction, the scarcity of a resource in the game setting can be rated on the following scale (from least to most scarce):\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Abundant:\b0  The resource is virtually everywhere; the average person probably has at least some of it at any given time.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Uncommon:\b0  The resource isn\rquote t something that you\rquote d just stumble upon accidentally but if you put concerted effort into it, you would probably find some.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Hard to Get:\b0  The resource is in short supply or is somehow heavily regulated; most people don\rquote t have ready access to it at all but if you have special access or know the right people, you can probably get some.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Very Hard to Get:\b0  The resource is absent from all the common places and even people with special access find it a significant challenge to track some down. Don\rquote t be surprised if you can\rquote t get any at all.\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa120\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Impossible to Get:\b0  Stockpiles of this resource simply don\rquote t exist; people that are especially resourceful might have been prudent enough to snare some for their personal supply, but that\rquote s it.\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 The scarcity rating of a resource affects a Protagonist\rquote s attempt to either scavenge from the environment (using the \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  skill) or rummage through their personal \ldblquote resource stash\rdblquote  to find it. The table below summarizes the effects of scarcity.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clvmgf\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clcbpat9\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clcbpat9\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Scarcity\cell\pard\intbl\qc Consumable Resources (marked \'a9)\cell Non-Consumable Resources\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clvmrg\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3484\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8182\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\cell\fs20 Effect on \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  Tests\cell Effect on Resources Tests\cell Effect on \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  Tests\cell Effect on Resources Tests\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8182\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs22 Abundant\cell\fs20 No test required; search is automatically successful.\cell On successful \b Resources\b0  test, a full \lquote unit\rquote  of the resource is found in Protagonist\rquote s collection, in perfect condition. \cell No test required; search is automatically successful.\cell On successful \b Resources\b0  test, a pristine version of the item is found in Protagonist\rquote s collection. \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8182\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs22 Uncommon\cell\fs20 May be found with a standard \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033\b0  test.\cell On successful \b Resources\b0  test, some quantity of the resource is found. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 20 or less, the discovery is half a \lquote unit\rquote . \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 A critical success or a standard success with die roll 21+ discovers a full \lquote unit\rquote\cell May be found with a standard \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033\b0  test.\cell On successful \b Resources\b0  test, some form of the item is found. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 20 or less, the item is heavily worn \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 A critical success or a standard success with die roll 21+ discovers a pristine item.  \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8182\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs22 Hard to Get\cell\fs20 May be found with a \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033  \b0 test modified by -20. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 10 or less, a spoiled and potentially dangerous version is unearthed.\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 A critical success or a standard success with die roll 11+ finds a safe supply.\cell\b Resources\b0  tests are made at \b half\b0  the effective Resources rating. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 20 or less, a spoiled and potentially dangerous version is unearthed.\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 A standard success with a roll of 21+ yields a safe resource but only half a \lquote unit\rquote .\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 Only if the test was a critical success, is a full \lquote unit\rquote  of perfectly safe resource discovered.\cell May be found with a \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033  \b0 test modified by -20. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 10 or less, a junk version of the resource is found.\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 A critical success or a standard success with die roll 11+ finds a pristine version of the resource.\cell\b Resources\b0  tests are made at \b half\b0  the effective Resources rating. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 20 or less, a junk version of the resource is found.\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 A standard success with a die roll 21+ finds a heavily worn version.\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 Only if the test was a critical success, is a pristine version of the resource discovered.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8182\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs22 Very Hard to Get\cell\fs20 May only be found with successes on \b\i both\b0\i0  a \b Luck\b0  roll and a \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033  \b0 test at -40. \par
\par
If the \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  test is a standard success and the die roll is 10 or less, a spoiled and potentially dangerous version is unearthed.\par
\par
A critical success on \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  or a standard success with die roll 11+ finds a safe supply.\par
\cell\b Resources\b0  tests are made at \b quarter\b0  the effective Resources rating. \par
\par
If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 20 or less, a spoiled and potentially dangerous version is unearthed.\par
\par
A standard success with a roll of 21+ yields a safe resource but only half a \lquote unit\rquote .\par
\par
Only if the roll was 01, is a full \lquote unit\rquote  of perfectly safe resource discovered.\cell May only be found with successes on \b\i both\b0\i0  a \b Luck\b0  roll and a \lang3081\b Scavenge\lang1033  \b0 test at -40. \par
\par
If the \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  test is a standard success and the die roll is 10 or less, a junk version is unearthed instead.\par
\par
A standard success on \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  with die roll 11+ finds a heavily worn version.\par
\par
A critical success on \lang3081 Scavenge\lang1033  finds a pristine version.\cell\b Resources\b0  tests are made at \b quarter\b0  the effective Resources rating. \par
\par
If the test is a standard success and the die roll is 20 or less, a junk version of the resource is found.\par
\par
A standard success with a die roll 21+ finds a heavily worn version.\par
\par
Only if the roll was 01, is a pristine version of the resource discovered.\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1270\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3484\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5886\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8182\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fs22 Impossible to Get\cell\fs20 No test required; search automatically fails.\cell\b Resources\b0  tests are made at \b quarter\b0  the effective Resources rating. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 Any test that is not a critical success fails to find the item in the Protagonist\rquote s collection in any quantity or quality.\par
\fs16\par
\fs20 Critical rolls locate spoiled and potentially dangerous stocks unless the roll was 01, in which case a further \b Luck\b0  roll is made: failure indicates a half \lquote unit\rquote  of safe resource; success a full \lquote unit\rquote  of safe resource. \cell No test required; search automatically fails.\cell\b Resources\b0  tests are made at \b quarter\b0  the effective Resources rating. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 Any test that is not a critical success fails to find the item in the Protagonist\rquote s collection in any form. \par
\fs16\par
\fs20 Critical rolls locate junk versions unless the roll was 01, in which case a further \b Luck\b0  roll is made: failure indicates heavily worn items; success indicates pristine. \cell\row\pard\sl276\slmult1\fs22\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 5.3\tab The Fine Art of Jury-Rigging\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Protagonists may often find themselves faced with an inability to track down the exact equipment or devices that they really need to get something done. No amount of scrounging or rummaging through each person\rquote s resources pool will track down the obscure item they need. What can a Protagonist group do in that situation? One option is to devise a plan to hunt down a collection of less-scarce component items and cobble together some kind of hodge-podge out of the parts. This is the fine art of jury-rigging.\par
In \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 , all attempts to build these kinds of lash-ups are governed by \lang3081\b the Repair/Devise skill\lang1033\b0 . \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 The players should describe exactly what they plan to construct and what components they hope to use. Ideally there should be some kind of logic or rationale behind why such items might come together in the way imagined, but ultimately it is up to you as Game Moderator to decide whether the planned jury-rigged device has any chance of working.\par
Once the plan is made, choose a scarcity for each component parts \endash  hopefully somewhat better than the scarcity of the original item \endash  and the Protagonists can venture forth (or rummage around their resource pools) to see if they can find all the pieces they need. Once they have each part, one or more skill tests will be needed to successfully assemble the final item or device.\par
\pard At best, a lash-up created in this way qualities as a \lquote heavily worn\rquote  version of the real item or device. If any discovery rolls along the way yielded up sub-standard parts, or the skill rolls were only marginally successful, you might decide the lash-up is barely-functional \lquote junk\rquote  (see \b PRE-LOVED ITEMS AND SPOILED GOODS\b0  on page \lang3081 64\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb240\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 6.0\tab Vehicles\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Depending on the nature of the game setting, different types of simple or sophisticated vehicles might be common items. If the Protagonists or their adversary have access to such vehicles, the following guidelines may assist when dangerous and/or action-oriented scenes involving vehicles arise during play.\par
Vehicles have three basic statistics:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Hit Points\b0  and \b Armor\b0 , in case they\rquote re involved in combat, and \par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Speed\b0  ratings that affect chases.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 6.1\tab Hit Points and Armor\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Each vehicle counts as a Huge target (see \b HUGE\b0 , page \lang3081 58\lang1033 ). It takes damage from unarmed attacks and small weapons such as knives and clubs only when the Game Moderator thinks it makes sense.\par
A vehicle that loses \b half\b0  its Hit Points is badly damaged. It can\rquote t be operated without a relevant skill test (depending on the type of vehicle). The next time such a test \i fumbles\i0 , the vehicle fails altogether until repaired. Repairing a damaged vehicle requires time, parts, and successful application of one or more skill tests. Even if repaired, the vehicle might now qualify as \lquote heavily worn\rquote  or \lquote junk\rquote  (see \b\caps Pre-Loved Items and Spoiled Goods\b0\caps0 , page \lang3081 64\lang1033 ).\par
A vehicle that loses \i all\i0  of its Hit Points is demolished. It will never function again.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 6.1.1\tab Speed\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\b0\f1 When comparing Vehicles, there is a range of different vehicle speeds. A vehicle with a \lquote Fast\rquote  rating grants a +20% bonus to any \b Drive\b0  or \b Sailing\b0  test to pursue or escape. A \lquote Slow\rquote  vehicle incurs a \u8722?20% penalty instead, while a \lquote Very Slow\rquote  vehicle attracts a \u8722?40% penalty. An \lquote Average\rquote  rating confers no modifier.\par
A vehicle that\rquote s notorious for poor handling or that\rquote s in bad shape might counts as \lquote heavily worn\rquote  or \lquote junk\rquote  (see above) at the GM\rquote s discretion.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 6.1.2\tab Some Example Vehicles\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat9\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8927\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 >> Land Vehicles\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1959\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6007\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7131\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7979\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8927\pard\intbl Vehicle Type\cell Description\cell Hit Points\cell Armor\cell Speed\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1959\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6007\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7131\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7979\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8927\pard\intbl Cart, Horse-Drawn\cell Light vehicles intended to carry a single person, possibly with an out-rider\cell 15\emdash 20\cell 2\cell Average\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1959\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6007\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7131\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7979\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8927\pard\intbl Cart, Man-Drawn\cell Two-wheeled vehicle for cargo. Drawn by one or more people\cell 15-20\cell 1\cell Very Slow\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1959\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6007\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7131\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx7979\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8927\pard\intbl Wagon, Horse- or Bullock-Drawn\cell Four-wheeled vehicle for cargo; drawn by a team of animals\cell 20\emdash 25\cell 1\cell Slow\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 6.1.3\tab Ramming\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The Game Moderator decides how deadly a collision ought to be. Here are a few suggestions for a vehicle\rquote s ramming damage.\par
\b AT VERY LOW SPEED:\b0  1D4 damage. A \ldblquote Very Slow\rdblquote  vehicle cannot go faster than this.\par
\b AT LOW SPEED:\b0  1D6 or 2D6 damage. A \ldblquote Slow\rdblquote  vehicle cannot go faster than this.\par
\b AT MODERATE/HIGH SPEED:\b0  roll half the vehicle\rquote s maximum HP as a Lethality rating. An \ldblquote Average\rdblquote  or \ldblquote Fast\rdblquote  vehicle cannot go faster than this. \par
If the target is a huge creature or another vehicle, the ramming vehicle suffers half ramming damage based on the target\rquote s HP. \par
A vehicle\rquote s Armor rating acts as Armor Piercing for its ramming damage. \par
Every passenger in a ramming vehicle takes 1D6 damage. Every passenger in a rammed vehicle takes 2D6 damage. A passenger in a vehicle that rams a target less than huge size suffers no damage.\lang3081\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\b\f0\fs28 7.0\tab Sanity\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Sanity Points represent the resilience of \cf3 the relationship between your Protagonist\rquote s personality and the world. With high SAN, your Protagonist has confidence in his or her place in the world. A high SAN score is marked by insight, self-awareness, and a life-affirming view of reality. With low SAN, the deadly truth of the universe has begun to overwhelm your Protagonist. With no SAN, your Protagonist is forever lost.\par
\pard Unlike the protagonists in many tabletop roleplaying games, \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Protagonists may begin play with a level of mental scarring due to the harshness of their upbringing. This scarring can manifest itself in different ways \endash  reduced starting SAN, mental disorders, or adaptation to traumatic stimuli. The Protagonist creations rules outline mechanics for determining this psychological damage (\b\caps Mental Damage from Harsh UPBRINGINGs\b0\caps0 , page \lang3081 40\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.1\tab Sanity Losses\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf3\b0\f1\fs22 When your Protagonist faces a threat to sanity, make a SAN test: roll his or her current SAN or lower of 1D100 to take a diminished loss of SAN points; roll higher than your Protagonist\rquote s SAN and he or she suffers a greater loss of SAN points.\par
Sanity losses look like: 0/1D4 or 1D6/1D20. The number on the left is how much SAN your Protagonist loses on a successful SAN test; the one on the right is how much SAN your Protagonist loses on a failed test.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.2\tab Rules of Thumb for SAN Loss\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 If the cost of failing a SAN test is 1D6 or less, the cost of success is usually zero. If the cost of failure is 1D8 or 1D10, the cost of success is usually 1. Some unnatural events and encounters are even more catastrophic.\par
A critical success with a Sanity roll means your Protagonist loses the least possible SAN. If the loss for succeeding at the Sanity roll would have been 1D4, he or she loses 1 point. \par
Fumbling a Sanity roll means your Protagonist loses the most possible SAN. If the loss for failing the Sanity roll would have been 1D20, he or she loses 20 points.\par
\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Optional Rule: Keep SAN Secret\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\sl276\slmult1 For greater suspense, each player should keep his or her Protagonist\rquote s current SAN secret from the other players (of course, the Game Moderator must also know all SAN scores). Another approach is for the Game Moderator to keep the current SAN of all Protagonists a secret \i even from the players\i0 . You know your Protagonist has lost SAN and you\rquote ll know when your Protagonist goes insane, but you won\rquote t know the point totals, adding a welcome uncertainty to the game.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.3\tab Explore the Loss\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 When your Protagonist loses SAN, take a second to describe it. If the Protagonist loses a few points, how does that look to the people around him or her? Does the Protagonist jump or cry out in terror? Does the Protagonist stare in shock? Does the Protagonist back away involuntarily? If your Protagonist kills someone and loses no SAN, what does that say about the Protagonist?\par
What are the long-term effects of repeatedly losing SAN? What strong beliefs or motivations are eroding as your Protagonist\rquote s SAN falls? The game is more potent when you play out those details and let them shape your Protagonist.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.4\tab Threats to SAN\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The three major threats to SAN are \i Violence\i0 , \i Helplessness \i0 and the \i Unnatural\i0 .\par
These categories can overlap. Being tied up and tortured might trigger both Violence and Helplessness. It\rquote s up to the Game Moderator to decide which aspects affects the Protagonist.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.4.1\tab Violence\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Killing other humans is inherently harmful to sanity. While wrestling and punching people is within biological norms, bludgeoning someone to death is not instinctive. Violence can drive you insane if you\rquote re not careful.\par
In combat, you must make a SAN test for a trauma \i the first time it happens in that fight\i0 . Outside of combat, every individual incident triggers its own SAN loss.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.4.2\tab Helplessness\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The essential human impulse is to act. True inactivity is unwholesome to the human psyche.\par
Note that helplessness often makes violence worse, just like violence makes helplessness worse.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.4.3\tab The Unnatural\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Finally there\rquote s the unnatural, the inhuman things of the Cthulhu Mythos that haunt the edges of existence. The unnatural troubles us because it is wholly outside of human experience. It wounds our sense of connection to the world by causing huge gaps in understanding.\par
This is why your Unnatural skill limits maximum SAN. The more you understand of mankind\rquote s \i actual \i0 position in the cosmos, the harder it is to navigate in the \lquote real\rquote  world.\par
If a Protagonist faces the Unnatural and loses 0 SAN, it may mean the Protagonist has adapted to the reality of the Unnatural in some small way \emdash  or it may mean simple denial, refusing to admit the Unnatural experience was real. It\rquote s up to the player.\par
\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh172\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\b Suffering Violence \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Loss\b0\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh2327\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Ambushed or hit by ranged weapon\tab\tab 0/1\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Find a corpse or a mangled carcass\tab\tab 0/1\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Find mutilated corpse of infant or loved one\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Stabbed, strangled or shot\tab  \tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Suffer a permanent injury\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Set on fire\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Reduced to 2 HP or less \tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Tortured \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D10\b\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh230\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\b Inflicting Violence \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Loss\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh3085\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Incapacitate or cripple an innocent \tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Destroy a teammate\rquote s body to\par
\pard\intbl\li720 thwart discovery* \tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Kill in defense of oneself or another*\tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Kill a murderous enemy\par
\pard\intbl\li720 in cold blood* \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Torture a victim\tab\tab  \tab\tab\tab 0/1D8\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Accidentally kill an innocent* \tab\tab\tab 0/1D8\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Kill an innocent in cold blood,\par
\pard\intbl\li720 even for a very good reason* \tab\tab\tab 1/1D10\par
\pard\intbl * For a failed roll, add 1 per victim beyond the first, up to the maximum possible die-roll: 4 for 1D4, 6 for 1D6, \i etc.\b\i0\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b0\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh232\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\b Helplessness \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Loss\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh1550\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Being dismissed from one\rquote s role/job\tab\tab 0/1\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Nearly get an Individual Bond hurt or killed\tab 0/1\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Losing all personal Permanent Resources\tab 0/1\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 A friend suffers permanent harm\par
\pard\intbl\li720 or gains a disorder\tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 A Bond\rquote s score is reduced to zero \tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Imprisoned or held against will\tab\tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Waking paralyzed or blind\tab  \tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Find a friend\rquote s remains \tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 An Individual Bond suffers permanent harm \par
\pard\intbl\li720 or gains a disorder\tab\tab\tab\tab 1/1D4\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Shunned by all members of a Community\par
\pard\intbl\li720 Bonded organization\tab\tab\tab\tab 1/1D4\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Flung into a pit of corpses \tab\tab\tab 0/1D4\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 See or hear a friend being\par
\pard\intbl\li720 gruesomely killed \tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Learn an Individual Bond has been killed\tab\tab 1/1D6\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 See or hear an Individual Bond \par
\pard\intbl\li720 gruesomely killed \tab\tab\tab\tab 1/1D8\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Learn that a Community Bonded organization \par
\pard\intbl\li720 has been destroyed \tab\tab\tab\tab 1/1D6\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Act in a way that directly leads to collapse\par
\pard\intbl\li720 of a Community Bonded organization\tab\tab 1/1D8\b\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\b0\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh80\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\lang1033\b The Unnatural \tab\tab\tab\tab\tab\tab Loss\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trrh2810\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Attempting \lang3081 Reassure\lang1033  on a\par
\pard\intbl\li720 character who lost SAN to the Unnatural \tab 0/1\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Witnessing a supernatural effect\par
\pard\intbl\li720 that\rquote s apparently benign \tab\tab\tab 0/1\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Witnessing a violent supernatural effect \tab 0/1D6\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Seeing a corpse walk \tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Subjected to an overtly\par
\pard\intbl\li720 supernatural effect \tab\tab\tab\tab 0/1D6\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Suffering a violent supernatural assault \tab\tab 1/1D8\par
\pard\intbl\fi720\li3600\tab or more\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf3\f8\fs20\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.5\tab Insanity and Disorders\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Protagonists who lose excessive SAN lose control of themselves, suffering insanity and mental disorders.\par
\pard\b TEMPORARY INSANITY (PAGE \lang3081 72\lang1033 ):\b0  A Protagonist who loses 5 or more points of SAN in a \i single roll \i0 suffers \i temporary insanity\i0 .\par
\b DISORDER (PAGE \lang3081 73\lang1033 ):\b0  Every time your Protagonist\rquote s SAN is reduced to his or her Breaking Point (see \b DERIVED ATTRIBUTES\b0  on page \lang3081 11\lang1033 ), he or she gains a new \i disorder\i0 . Immediately reset your Protagonist\rquote s Breaking Point to your Protagonist\rquote s current SAN minus POW. Even if SAN rises back above the old Breaking Point, the disorder and the new Breaking Point remain.\par
\b PERMANENT INSANITY (PAGE \lang3081 77\lang1033 ):\b0  If your Protagonist hits 0 SAN, he or she suffers \i permanent insanity \i0 and becomes the property of the Game Moderator.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.6\tab Temporary Insanity\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 In a moment of overwhelming stress \emdash  after losing 5 or more SAN \i in a single roll\i0  \emdash  your Protagonist loses self-control. We call it temporary insanity. For a short time, you cannot control your Protagonist\rquote s actions. Your Protagonist\rquote s primitive brain switches to pure panic, with one of three possible responses: \i Flee, Struggle, \i0 or \i Submit\i0 .\par
Work with the Game Moderator to determine which stance your Protagonist takes. Each is more likely in some circumstances than others. \par
If the circumstances are calm, it may be possible to talk your Protagonist down from temporary insanity.\par
Such attempts are tests of the \lang3081\b Reassure\lang1033  \b0 skill. \par
In the absence of anything like that, your Protagonist loses control until the insanity runs its course.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.6.1\tab Flee\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist must move away from the SAN-affecting stimulus at top speed in any direction. Your Protagonist must do this for a number of turns equal to his or her CON, whereupon your Protagonist falls to the ground exhausted (see \b EXHAUSTION\b0  on page \lang3081 47\lang1033 ), or until your Protagonist feels \lquote safe\rquote , whichever happens first. This is a common reaction against Unnatural and Violence SAN threats.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.6.2\tab Struggle\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 This is lashing out randomly at the nearest threat, no matter how insurmountable it might be. Once this course is set upon, your Protagonist has no choice but to fight until he or she is killed, unconscious, or restrained. This is a common reaction against Helplessness and Violence SAN threats.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.6.3\tab Submit\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 This is shutting down or passing out from shock. If conscious, your Protagonist is catatonic and paralyzed until the Game Moderator decides he or she snaps out of it. When your Protagonist comes to, it\rquote s likely he or she has suppressed the trauma that caused his or her collapse. Remembering details requires an \b INT\'d75\b0  test and is terribly stressful. This is a common reaction against Unnatural and Helplessness SAN threats.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.6.4\tab Understanding the Unnatural\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Whenever your Protagonist goes temporarily insane or develops a disorder due to an encounter with the Unnatural, he or she also gains some deeper understanding of the true nature of reality. \par
If your Protagonist had no prior knowledge of the Cthulhu Mythos (i.e., has an Unnatural skill rating of 0), such an experience causes him or her to gain +5 percentiles in the Unnatural skill. Even if they already knew about the Unnatural, such an experience grants a further +1 percentile to the Unnatural skill. \par
This increase also serves to reduce the Protagonist\rquote s maximum SAN (and if current SAN is higher than this value, also causes it to drop to the new maximum).\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl >> Optional Rule: Insane Insight\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Sometimes Protagonists who face massive psychological damage from unnatural trauma come away with strange insights. If your Protagonist suffers temporary insanity due to an Unnatural trauma, he or she might gain some special insight into the specific creature or Mythos Power encountered. Immediately after going insane, the Protagonist can attempt an \b INT\'d75\b0  test \endash  if this roll \i fails\i0 , the Game Moderator can provide the Protagonist with some salient detail about the monstrosity, which may prove helpful in defeating it.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.7\tab Disorders\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 A Protagonist whose SAN reaches the Breaking Point gains a disorder. When suffering from a disorder, the mind maladapts to mental trauma with long-term neuroses. A disorder is like a release valve for intolerable stress. Indulging in it helps your Protagonist cope. It\rquote s possible to suffer from multiple disorders at the same time.\par
Any disorder is negative in the long term, but some are worse than others. Whatever the source of the disorder, it takes the form of an irrational adaptation to the trauma that produced it. It may manifest a few hours after the trauma, or it might take days, weeks, or months to appear. The player and the Game Moderator negotiate the exact nature of your Protagonist\rquote s psychological trauma, so it makes sense. If your Protagonist saw his or her partner die in a fire, developing \i pyrophobia \i0 makes sense for example.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.7.1\tab Acute Episodes\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 A disorder is a chronic, ongoing condition. It lurks under the surface, threatening to erupt when things get bad. Each disorder suggests triggers that bring on acute episodes. Acute episodes last as long as your Protagonist is in the crisis or in the presence of the trigger and usually for at least a few hours afterward. In an acute episode, the Protagonist succumbs to the disorder\rquote s internal logic and must act accordingly. If your Protagonist suffers from more than one disorder, the Game Moderator decides which comes to the fore.\par
\pard\b REPRESSING AN EPISODE:\b0  When an acute episode begins, your Protagonist can attempt to repress it by projecting the stress and trauma onto a Bond. See \b USING BONDS TO REPRESS INSANITY\b0  on page \lang3081 78\lang1033 .\par
\b EFFECTS OF AN EPISODE:\b0  Suffering an acute episode of a disorder often means your Protagonist can\rquote t take some actions (or can attempt them only with a penalty), or your Protagonist \i must \i0 take some actions. The Game Moderator always decides the exact repercussions, and whether it happens immediately or builds gradually, in the aftermath of the trauma.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 When your Protagonist is going through an acute episode, make sure it is obvious to everyone that something is wrong. \par
An \b Insight\b0  roll can diagnose your Protagonist\rquote s particular disorder.\par
It may be possible for someone to talk your Protagonist down despite the crisis or the presence of the trigger, reducing the impact of the disorder so the Protagonist can regain self-control. That takes a few minutes.\par
Such attempts are tests of the \lang3081\b Reassure\lang1033  \b0 skill. \par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl >> Psychoactive Sedatives\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10461\pard\intbl Your Protagonist may have access to substances which can stave off the onset of an acute episode or dull its effects. These are, at best, short-term remedies and come with their own negative impacts.\par
Taking a powerful sedative (e.g., drinking heavily, \i requies magna\i0 ) gives your Protagonist a +20% bonus to resist an acute episode of a disorder at the cost of a \u8722?20% penalty to everything else. Using such drugs frequently makes addiction to them a likely result of your Protagonist\rquote s next disorder. If that happens, the drugs no longer confer any bonus to reduce acute episodes of a disorder, but still inflict the penalty.\cell\row\pard\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.7.2\tab Sample Disorders \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 There are many adaptations the mind makes when exposed to traumatic events, whether they be violence and gore, feelings of utter helplessness, or the inherent \lquote wrongness\rquote  of unnatural Cthulhu Mythos beings. The specific disorder received by a Protagonist should never be a random roll on a table, but something specifically selected to relate to the trauma they suffered.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Alcohol Habituation\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Your Protagonist relies on intoxicating liquor to get by. However much harm the addiction causes, your Protagonist needs the relief it offers. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute episode, an overwhelming need. Feeding it usually imparts a \u8722?20% penalty to stats and skills for a few hours due to intoxication or distraction. And even in the best of times, going 24 hours without feeding the addiction costs 1D6 WP and prevents your Protagonist from recovering any WP. Every further 24 hours costs 1D6 WP. At 2 or fewer WP, your Protagonist does irrational, self-destructive things to feed the addiction.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Amnesia\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 This is a common disorder from encounters with the unnatural. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute episode, which erases all memory of the episode until your Protagonist finds a way to bring it back.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Hearing Voices\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 From time to time your Protagonist experiences auditory hallucinations in which you hear voices which others cannot. Often these are running commentaries about your thoughts or actions, usually critical and derogatory. Any time you lose 2+ SAN in any single roll, the voices return for 6+1D6 hours. You can try to hide it from those around you, but while in the grip of one of episodes you are very distracted and will automatically fail any Alertness or Search rolls and suffer a \endash 20% penalty to any other action requiring concentration.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Mania\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Your Protagonist displays a euphoric and perhaps irritable mood that is consistently present. This may include frenzied activity for no obvious reason, uncharacteristic garrulousness, a random stream\u8208?of\u8208?consciousness flow of ideas, or difficulty sleeping. An acute episode is triggered whenever your Protagonist loses 2+ SAN in a single roll. During an acute episode all tasks which require concentration or fine control are at \b one\u8208?fifth chance.\b0\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Melancholia\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Acute melancholia means total despair and a crushing inability to get anything done. It sometimes takes the shape of overwhelming guilt. An acute episode is triggered by reminders of past traumas your Protagonist suffered or inflicted, which can come in the most surprising forms and moments. During an acute episode, every skill or stat test costs 1D4 WP.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Obsession\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Your Protagonist becomes fixated on some person, place, event, act, or idea. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute episode, which lasts days. In that time, any long-term action or skill use\emdash anything taking more than a few hours\emdash is at \u8722?20% because your Protagonist\rquote s mind is so often wrapped around its obsession.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Paranoid Delusions\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 A delusional state of extreme suspicion, in which a fear of invisible enemies pervades one\rquote s world-view. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute episode. Unless your Protagonist finds a way to stifle his or her delusions, he or she can\rquote t trust or rely on anyone. Every event, every disagreement or source of suspicion is a clue to a conspiracy against the Protagonist.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Phobia or Philia\par
\pard\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 A common affliction arising from traumatic experiences is the development of an irrational fear of something related (directly or by association) with the incident. The term \i\ldblquote phobia\rdblquote\i0  was coined in about 1800 as a term to describe such debilitating conditions (prior to that, the disorder would be less-scientifically termed \i\ldblquote fear of \'85\rdblquote\i0 ). Whenever a Protagonist is in the presence of a trigger for his or her phobia, he or she must make a \b SAN\b0  test (even if the trigger is not terrifying in any way to others). Failure means an acute episode has been triggered, during which there\rquote s little choice but to suffer the Flee or Submit response to temporary insanity (see page 72). A nearby box provides some examples of phobias; searching online will reveal a huge array of other (sometimes quite weird) phobias.\par
A less common response to experiencing something shocking is the development of an irrational fetish or allure for something odd that is associated with the situation (perhaps which somehow related to the Protagonist\rquote s survival). These are called philias and work in a similar way to phobias in that whenever the afflicted Protagonist is in the presence of his or her irrational fetish a \b SAN\b0  roll is required to maintain any degree of self\u8208?control. If failed, an acute episode results during which the Game Moderator will dictate your Protagonist\rquote s actions until he or she regains control.  The list of phobias shown nearby can be converted into philias by simply inverting them: for example, where scotophobia is a fear of darkness, scotophilia is an obsessive and irrational predisposition to shroud oneself in darkness.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Plagued By Nightmares\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 Your Protagonist feels exhausted all the time, barely able to get out of bed in the morning. It might be that some terribly traumatic encounter has left its scars upon them, or it may be just the accumulated stresses of a lifestyle with too much mental fatigue. But being bereft of energy does not equate to being well rested \endash  in fact, your Protagonist sleeps poorly and is always waking to anxiety-inducing memories from the past. An acute episode is triggered by tangible reminders of past traumas your Protagonist suffered or inflicted. In an acute episode, the Game Moderator chooses one effect: your Protagonist either reacts violently to threats only the Protagonist perceives, or suffers an acute bout of melancholy. (See \b MELANCHOLIA\b0  nearby for details.)\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\fi-864\li864\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\lang1033\i\f0 Self-Love (Narcissism)\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\lang3081\i0\f1 There are some whose certainty in their own pre-eminence knows no bound. Francis Bacon described such individuals as being \i sui amantes sine rivali \i0 (\ldblquote lovers of themselves without rival\rdblquote ) \endash  today we would call them narcissists. Some people afflicted with this disorder see themselves as messiahs, or as exempt from ordinary morality. Losing 2+ SAN in any single roll triggers an acute episode, in which every hint of doubt about your Protagonist\rquote s superiority fills him or her with indignation. That causes every use of a stat or skill to get help or make a good impression to fail.\par
\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb120\sa120\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 Phobias\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\cf0\b0\f2\'b7\tab\f1 ACROPHOBIA: Fear of heights\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 AGOROPHOBIA: Fear of open places\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 AILUROPHOBIA: Fear of cats\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 ANDROPHOBIA (for female Protagonists): Fear of males\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 APIPHOBIA: Fear of bees\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 ARACHNOPHOBIA: Fear of spiders\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 ASTROPHOBIA: Fear of thunder, lightning and storms\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 BACTERIOPHOBIA: Fear of bacteria\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 BACTRACHOPHOBIA: Fear of frogs and toads\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 BATHOPHOBIA: Fear of the deep sea\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 BELONEPHOBIA: Fear of pins and needles\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 BOTANOPHOBIA: Fear of plants\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 CATOPTROPHOBIA: Fear of mirrors\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 CLAUSTROPHOBIA: Fear of confined spaces\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 DEMOPHOBIA: Fear of crowds\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 DENDROPHOBIA: Fear of trees\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 DORAPHOBIA: Fear of fur\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 ENTOPHOBIA: Fear of insects\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 GYNEPHOBIA (for male Protagonists): Fear of females\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 HEMATOPHOBIA: Fear of blood\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 HYLEPHOBIA: Fear of forests\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 IATROPHOBIA: Fear of doctors\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 MONOPHOBIA: Fear of being alone\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 NECROPHOBIA: Fear of dead things\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 OPHIOPHOBIA: Fear of snakes\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 PYROPHOBIA: Fear of fire\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 SCOTOPHOBIA: Fear of darkness\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 TAPHEPHOBIA: Fear of being buried alive\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 TECHNOPHOBIA: Fear of technology\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 THALASSOPHOBIA: Fear of the sea\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 TRICHOPHOBIA: Fear of hair\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 TRISKADEKAPHOBIA: Fear of the number 13\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 XENOPHOBIA: Fear of foreigners\par
\pard\intbl\fi-357\li714\sa120\f2\'b7\tab\f1 ZOOPHOBIA: Fear of Animals\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.8\tab Permanent Insanity\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 A Protagonist who drops to 0 SAN is effectively \lquote lost.\rquote  Just as being reduced to 0 Hit Points permanently removes your Protagonist from your control through physical death, being reduced to 0 SAN permanently removes your Protagonist from your control through insanity. Protagonists at 0 SAN have embraced a world of violence, helplessness, and death. No therapy or treatment will ever bring them back.\par
It remains up to the Game Moderator to determine when the Protagonist is \lquote removed\rquote  from play. Sometimes it is instant; after the SAN loss, the Protagonist collapses weeping and refuses to re-engage with reality.\par
\pard Sometimes it\rquote s more subtle. Many dangerous psychopaths get by for months or years without detection. A player who enjoys this kind of challenge may work in tandem with the Game Moderator to keep playing a character with 0 SAN as if things were normal. If you keep all SAN totals secret (see \b OPTIONAL RULE: KEEP SAN SECRET\b0\fs16  \fs22 on page \lang3081 70\lang1033 ), this should not be difficult.\par
Usually, a character who reaches 0 SAN is either \i Catatonic\i0 , \i Delusional\i0 , or \i Psychopathic\i0 .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Catatonia\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 Catatonia is complete separation. Your Protagonist\rquote s mind refuses to engage with the world that injured it. Your Protagonist no longer speaks, or eats (without prompting), or looks after him or herself; your Protagonist stares into space in a trance. Some catatonics go so deep they no longer react to physical pain. Others rise in and out of consciousness.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Delusions\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 Your Protagonist is raving, incapable of holding a conversation that does not stray into insanity. Your Protagonist is absolutely certain of the truth of his or her delusions and acts and responds as though they are completely real, even if that means violence. Nothing can dissuade your Protagonist of their reality.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Psychopathy\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 This goes beyond ordinary sociopathy. At 0 SAN, empathy has been burned out of your Protagonist. The feelings and needs of others cannot touch him or her. People are mere objects for his or her amusement or use. Your Protagonist sometimes engages in appallingly merciless actions for gratification. Some psychopaths with 0 SAN appear fine; they are no longer emotionally functional or concerned with people on a human scale, but they keep a simulated veneer of civility. Many serial killers have been classified as functional psychopaths.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.9\tab Resisting Insanity\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 It\rquote s possible to resist SAN loss and insanity through adaptation and by placing stress on Individual and Community Bonds. But suffering a trauma always comes with a cost.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.9.1\tab Adapting to SAN Loss\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 People can become hardened to traumatic stimuli. What sends one Protagonist fleeing may seem mundane to an individual who has survived it often enough. Adaptation to Violence or to Helplessness means you always succeed at a Sanity roll for that type of trauma.\par
Adaptation to Violence or adaptation to Helplessness occurs after your Protagonist has lost SAN from that kind of trauma three times in a row \i without\i0  going temporarily insane from it or hitting the Breaking Point. The character sheet has spaces to mark your Protagonist\rquote s progress toward adaptation. Each time Violence or Helplessness reduces your Protagonist\rquote s SAN by 1 or more, mark a box on your character sheet to keep track of it. \par
If your Protagonist suffers insanity from Violence \i before\i0  all three boxes are marked, erase all the \ldblquote Violence\rdblquote  boxes and start again. If your Protagonist suffers insanity from Helplessness before all three boxes are marked, erase all the \ldblquote Helplessness\rdblquote  boxes and start again. If you fill in all three boxes for Violence or all three for Helplessness, your Protagonist becomes adapted to that type of stressor.\par
\b ADAPTING TO VIOLENCE:\b0  Unfortunately, being adapted to Violence means your Protagonist\rquote s empathy suffers. He or she permanently loses 1D6 CHA and the same amount from each Bond (Individual and Community).\par
\b ADAPTING TO HELPLESSNESS:\b0  Being adapted to Helplessness means your Protagonist\rquote s personal drive suffers. As soon as your Protagonist becomes adapted to Helplessness, he or she permanently loses 1D6 POW.\par
\b ADAPTING TO THE UNNATURAL:\b0  There is no adapting to the unnatural. Things that exist beyond human comprehension are beyond \lquote getting used to.\rquote  Every new encounter is a fresh shock. The only way to \lquote adapt\rquote  to the Unnatural is to reach 0 SAN, whereupon the horrors of the Cthulhu Mythos make perfect sense and no longer inflict mental damage.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.9.2\tab Projecting Onto A Bond\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 When your Protagonist loses SAN, you may spend WP to reduce the loss. The amount is always 1D4: roll the die and reduce your WP by that much. \par
If your Protagonist still has at least 1 WP, reduce the SAN loss by the amount of WP spent \emdash  the amount you rolled \emdash  to a minimum of zero.\par
Now reduce one of your Protagonist\rquote s Bond scores by the \b same\b0  amount. It could be an Individual Bond or a Community Bond. The next time your Protagonist interacts with the subject of the Bond, decide what shape the projection takes. Does the Protagonist grow hostile and angry, irrationally blaming his or her loved one for imagined wrongs? Does the Protagonist abandon his community in favor of relationships with less importance and meaning? The stresses faced by Protagonists often wreck the families, friendships and associations that give them strength.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.9.3\tab Using Bonds to Repress Insanity\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Sometimes it\rquote s easier to cope with mental trauma if you pull strength and motivation from the relationships that give life meaning. You may attempt to repress the blind panic of temporary insanity or an acute episode of a disorder by spending Willpower Points. The amount is always 1D4: roll the die and reduce your WP by that much.\par
If your Protagonist still has at least 1 WP after spending the 1D4, describe how a Bond might help your Protagonist keep it together and reduce the Bond by the same amount. \par
Now attempt a SAN roll. If it succeeds, your Protagonist suppresses the insanity or disorder and behaves normally. If it fails, the attempt to repress the effects did not succeed \endash  they occur as normal, despite the points of WP and Bond strength sacrificed in the attempt.\par
Either way, make a note to describe later how the Bond has strained because your Protagonist has taken so much support from it.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 7.10\tab Recovering Sanity\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 There are a few ways to restore mental health. These are described below.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.10.1\tab Defeating Unnatural Creatures\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The Unnatural in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  represents such an affront to the human mind that gaining any control over it is a sort of victory. At the Game Moderator\rquote s discretion, any destruction of a Cthulhu Mythos infiltration by a Protagonist can restore hope \emdash  and in the process, SAN.\par
As a rule, destroying an unnatural creature or an object known to contain otherworldly power restores an amount of SAN equivalent to the lowest amount that could be lost for encountering it.\par
If the SAN loss is 1/1D6, for example, destroying it restores 1 SAN. If the SAN loss is 1D6/1D20, your Protagonist gains 1D6 SAN for destroying it.\par
This can mean your Protagonist gains more SAN from overcoming the threat than he or she actually lost from facing it. But it can never bring SAN higher than the \b Maximum SAN\b0  score: i.e., 99 minus your Protagonist\rquote s rating in the Unnatural skill.\par
Each Protagonist who was directly involved in putting the threat down gains this SAN increase.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.10.2\tab Concluding a Dangerous Adventure\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Once a deadly adventure has been successfully brought to a close, all Protagonists left alive can breathe a sigh of relief that \endash  for now at least \endash  the world is a safer place. The Game Moderator is justified in awarding such Protagonists a small increase in SAN (and published scenarios may include specific SAN rewards associated with different levels of success). Such gains can never push the Protagonist\rquote s current SAN any higher than \b Maximum SAN\b0  (99 \endash  Unnatural).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.10.3\tab Destroying Accounts of the Unnatural\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 To a Protagonist whose sanity has been blasted by revelations about the horrors of the Unnatural, the fact that accounts exist which lay bare such secrets is disturbing. It is via such dire accounts \endash  \lang3081 ancient tomes, scrolls or miscellaneous illuminated manuscripts\lang1033  \endash  that the madness spreads. Accordingly, some who have lost sanity from unnatural Mythos encounters make it their mission to track down such records and destroy them. What better way to protect humanity than rid it of these dangerous traps? This, in part, explains why true permanent accounts of the Unnatural are so rare.\par
\pard Protagonists who have experienced the Unnatural and who \i deliberately\i0  destroy a permanent record of secret information can earn a small boost to SAN, at the discretion of the Game Moderator. To qualify, the item in question must contain an actual authentic account of the Mythos (see page \lang3081 84\lang1033 ) and the Protagonist\rquote s actions must be deliberate, willful, and cause its permanent and total destruction. The Protagonist must also believe in the veracity of the account. \par
The amount of SAN increase depends upon the how many Mythos secrets the account reveals \endash  this is measured by the Unnatural skill point gain associated with reading/viewing the account.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2240\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4933\pard\intbl Unnatural Skill Gain\cell SAN gain from Destruction\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2240\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4933\pard\intbl +1 to +3\cell 1D3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2240\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4933\pard\intbl +4 to +6\cell 1D6\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2240\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4933\pard\intbl +7 to +12\cell 2D6\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2240\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4933\pard\intbl +13 to +16\cell 2D8\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2240\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4933\pard\intbl +17 or more\cell 2D10\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
Such gains can never push the Protagonist\rquote s current SAN any higher than \b Maximum SAN\b0  (99 \endash  Unnatural).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.10.4\tab Getting Help with Mental Illness\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 After the adventure your Protagonist can attempt to recuperate with empathetic colleagues or by focusing on his or her Bonds; the things that give your Protagonist strength (see \b DOWNTIME\b0 , below). Any such recovery can never push the Protagonist\rquote s current SAN any higher than his or her \b Recovery SAN\b0  (POW\'d75), or \b Maximum SAN\b0 , whichever is lower.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 7.10.5\tab Pursuing Personal Goals or Caring for Individuals\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Time spent between adventures doing things that naturally reassert your Protagonist\rquote s \lquote normal\rquote  life can slightly improve his or her SAN (see \b DOWNTIME\b0 , below). This can only increase current SAN up to his or her \b Recovery SAN\b0  (POW\'d75), or \b Maximum SAN\b0 , whichever is lower.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 8.0\tab Downtime\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Games of \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  should feature occasional scenes that \cf3 focus on Protagonists\rquote  everyday lives. These short vignettes should last no more than a few minutes. Typically, they occur between adventures, but the Game Moderator always decides when and whether one is appropriate. These vignettes are a chance to explore the most important things in your Protagonist\rquote s life \emdash  and to see whether those things are deteriorating thanks to the Protagonist\rquote s experience of the secret horrors of the world.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 8.1\tab What Changed\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 In a downtime vignette, take stock of what changed for your Protagonist in the last adventure.\par
\b BONDS DAMAGED OR BROKEN:\b0  Describe how each relationship has deteriorated.\par
\b PERMANENT INJURIES:\b0  Describe what they look like.\par
\b DISORDERS GAINED:\b0  Did your Protagonist hit the Breaking Point during the adventure? Now\rquote s the time for the Game Moderator to decide what disorder the Protagonist gains. \par
\b COMMUNITY:\b0  If your Protagonist misused his or her contacts, authority, or resources from his or her home community, describe how actions during the adventure may have impacted your Protagonist\rquote s reputation or standing. Does this impact any Community Bonds?\par
\b JUSTICE\b0 : Did your Protagonist break the rules of the local community? Does that impact any Individual or Community Bonds?\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 8.2\tab Personal Pursuits\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 For the vignette, the player chooses one of the following pursuits. Describe how your Protagonist is pursuing it, and roll the appropriate stat, skill, or SAN test to resolve it.\par
Choose from these pursuits:\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.1\tab Fulfill Responsibilities to Individuals\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If your Protagonist focuses on day-to-day obligations and relationships, describe something the Protagonist is doing to support an Individual Bond. Roll a SAN test. Success improves the Individual Bond by 1D6 (up to your Protagonist\rquote s CHA); a critical success also adds 1 SAN (up to your \b Recovery SAN\b0 ). Failure adds 1 to the Bond. A fumble means some disastrous conflict reduces the Individual Bond by 1D4 and your SAN by 1. Describe how the relationship has improved because of your Protagonist\rquote s efforts or worsened despite them.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.2\tab Reorganizing and Replenishing Personal Resources\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 As described in \b\caps Replenishing Resources, Removing Checkmarks\b0\caps0  (page \lang3081 26\lang1033 ), if your Protagonist actively drew from his or her personal pool of Resources during an adventure, there will be check marks on the character sheet to record this. By investing some downtime (half a day or more) to reorganize or replenish your stash of resources, all such checks marks can be erased. Describe the lengths your Protagonist goes to tidy up or restock.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.3\tab Gaining Favor of the Community at Large\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist may choose to spend time attempting to improve his or her status within a group or society, as represented by a Community Bond he or she \b\i already has\b0\i0 . This may involve influencing key individuals to build a support-base or working hard to solve the community\rquote s problems and earn their respect. \par
A major investment of time warrants a SAN test \endash  success means that your Protagonist\rquote s actions have drawn the attention of key people in the community. A fumbled SAN roll means that some terrible error of judgement by your Protagonist creates a negative reaction: this reduces the bond value by -1D3 and causes a loss of 1 point of SAN.\par
If the SAN roll succeeded, there is a chance that the positive attention from the community may convert into an increase in status. Make a second D100 roll and compare it to current \b Community Bond rating\'d75\b0 . If the roll is \i higher\i0  than the target, the Community Bond value improves:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If the original SAN roll was a \b normal success\b0 : +1 to bond value\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If the original SAN roll was a \b critical success\b0 : +2 to bond value\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 The causes of the increase or decrease in status should be described, along with their impact.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.4\tab Back to Nature\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist can spend time in contemplative seclusion, minimizing stress, distractions, and obligations. This isn\rquote t a holiday; it\rquote s extended time alone, or mostly alone, in an environment that\rquote s physically active but places few other demands on the Protagonist. This reduces one Bond (either Individual or Community) by 1 as you let other responsibilities lapse. Roll a SAN test. Success adds 1D4 SAN, or 4 for a critical (up to your \b Recovery SAN\b0 ). Failure adds 1 SAN. A fumble costs 1D4 SAN. Describe the impact of this time alone.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.5\tab Establish a New Individual Bond\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist may attempt to create a new Individual Bond with a character. This is not done lightly. It means this new character is developing into an essential, important part of your Protagonist\rquote s life. Attempt a \b CHA\'d75\b0  test. Success establishes a new Individual Bond with a score equal to half your Protagonist\rquote s CHA (round up). Unfortunately, devoting so much attention to the new Bond reduces the value of one other Bond \endash  either reduce an Individual Bond by 1D4 or a Community Bond by 1.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.6\tab Establish a New Community Bond\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist attempts to establish membership in a new community and assert some kind of status within its \lquote pecking order\rquote . You might do this because you have just arrived in a new place, or because you wish to take on a position of standing within a group (e.g., an elite order) that provides social benefits. Getting accepted to a position of trust within a community is not easy. Attempt a \b CHA\'d75\b0  test. Success establishes a new Community Bond with a score equal to \b half\b0  your Protagonist\rquote s Permanent Resources rating (round up). Devoting energy to currying the favor needed to establish the new Bond reduces the value of one other Bond \endash  either reduce an Individual Bond by 1D4 or a (different) Community Bond by 1.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.7\tab Get Help With Mental Illnesses\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 There is no such thing as clinical psychotherapy in this era of history. The days of well-ordered professional help for mental health issues have yet to be invented.\par
However, that does not mean that there are no methods to heal a damaged mind. Most of the remaining options involve the time-honored method of sharing with an empathetic person an account of the circumstances which created the mental trauma. This other person might be a spiritual adviser, a folk-psychiatrists, or just a kind-hearted fellow member of the community that is willing to calm and reassure you. \par
Being helped through the process of recovering from mental trauma is an ongoing process requiring honesty and commitment. Your Protagonist must decide whether to truthfully tell the empathetic person what caused the SAN loss.\par
\pard\fi-357\li714\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If your Protagonist tells the truth, there are risks. If the original SAN loss came from confronting the Cthulhu Mythos, and the empathic person \i believes\i0  your Protagonist\rquote s account, he or she may themselves lose SAN. \par
\pard\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 In order to determine whether your Protagonist benefits from the reassuring catharsis, roll against the empathic person\rquote s \b Reassure\b0  skill. If your Protagonist has described unnatural events and the empathetic person thinks they\rquote re delusions, this roll is at a \u8722?20% penalty. If it fumbles, your Protagonist loses 1 SAN. If it succeeds, your Protagonist regains 1D6 SAN (or 6 with a critical success), up to his or her \b Recovery SAN\b0 .\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If, on the other hand, if your Protagonist \i doesn\rquote t\i0  tell the empathetic person the truth, the potential for healing is limited. Make a Luck Roll. If it fumbles, your Protagonist loses 1 SAN. If it succeeds, your Protagonist regains 1D4 SAN (or 4 for a critical success), up to his or her \b Recovery SAN\b0 .\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 If your Protagonist suffers from a disorder, a critical success with the empathetic person\rquote s Reassure or Luck roll cures it. Your Protagonist also develops a Bond with the empathetic person equal to half your Protagonist\rquote s CHA (or add 1D4 to it if your Protagonist already has that Bond, up to the Protagonist\rquote s CHA). He or she also loses points from another bond of your choice (1D4 from one individual Bond or 1 from a Community Bond). Write a note saying \ldblquote cured\rdblquote  next to the disorder on the character sheet \emdash  but do not erase it. The next time you gain a disorder, you must roll another SAN test. If that fails, the \ldblquote cured\rdblquote  disorder returns in full force alongside the new one.\par
Regardless of whether the rolls result in improvements, the long hours spent with an empathetic person reduces one Bond (either Individual or Community) by 1 as you let other responsibilities lapse.\par
\lang3081\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\lang1033\b\f0 8.2.8\tab Improve a Skill or Stat\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 By training or studying extensively, your Protagonist can try to boost a stat or a skill. This reduces one Bond (either Individual or Community) by 1 as you let other responsibilities lapse. \par
Describe what your Protagonist is doing to improve the stat or skill: \lang3081 poring over crumbling tomes for INT or a skill, lifting weights for STR, meditating to strengthen self-discipline for POW, being tutored in the finer arts of leadership or social etiquette for CHA, working with the local "wise woman" to regain stat points permanently lost from an injury, etc.\lang1033  \par
If you wish to gain points in a skill you don\rquote t already possess and which has a Base Chance of 0%, you can \ul only\ulnone  do this if you are being trained by someone who has at least 20% in that skill. Under no circumstances can the Unnatural skill be improved through training.\par
Attempt a test of the stat \'d7 5 or the skill. If the test fails, your Protagonist has improved. Add 3D6 percentage points to the skill (to a maximum of 99%) or one point to the stat (to a maximum of 18).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.9\tab Personal Motivation\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist indulges in the things that he or she finds meaningful. This reduces one Bond (either Individual or Community) by 1 as you let other responsibilities lapse. Roll a SAN test. Success adds 1 SAN, or 1D4 for a critical (up to your Protagonist\rquote s \b Recovery SAN\b0 ). A fumble costs 1 SAN.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 8.2.10\tab Accounts of the Cthulhu Mythos / Learning Rituals\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1 Your Protagonist may have unearthed records \endash  e.g., \lang3081 ancient tomes, scrolls or miscellaneous illuminated manuscripts\lang1033  \endash  which claim to contain wisdom about the Cthulhu Mythos forces which haunt the world. He or she can devote time to trying to delve into such accounts or trying to learn the arcane rituals they describe. See \b\caps MADDENING Revelations\b0\caps0  on page \lang3081 84\lang1033  for more on how such research is performed.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\pagebb\s1\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 PART II: GAME MODERATOR RESOURCES\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 This section consists of a series of resources which are designed to help a Game Moderator design exciting and dangerous scenarios to challenge a Protagonist Group. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 9.0\tab Maddening Revelations\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 A common feature of Cthulhu Mythos fiction is the existence of musty old tomes which describe the \lquote truth\rquote  about mankind\rquote s perilous place in the universe, and the powers thirsting for cosmic upheaval. In the \lang3081 Medieval Era\lang1033  such revelations might be found buried in \lang3081 ancient tomes, scrolls or miscellaneous illuminated manuscripts\lang1033 . Alternatively, the secret knowledge might be passed down from generation-to-generation through spoken tales and mystic traditions.\par
Revelatory accounts and the secret information they contain can, if you wish, be important parts of your \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  game. Some of the revelations might describe supernatural powers or \ldblquote magickal effects\rdblquote  that Protagonists might be able to utilize to fight back the shadows. Often these will require they perform time-consuming rituals drawn from mystical traditions.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 9.1\tab Researching the Mythos\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 If you as Game Moderator want to include a form of revelatory information in your game, there are a few factors to consider:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 How will the Protagonist\rquote s locate it?\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 What skill rolls are needed to read it (or view it, or otherwise access its information)?\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 How long does it take to study the information before it is understood?\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Does the information cause a Sanity Loss to those who learn it?\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Does understanding the revelations cause an increase in skills?\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Does it impart some other benefit, such as the chance to learn a magickal ritual?\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Mythos accounts offer one of the few ways in which Protagonists may increase their rating in the \b Unnatural\b0  skill. Each has an associated amount of Unnatural skill gain that it might potentially impart \'85 if only the Protagonist is able to see past its disordered jumble of insane ideas. Simple accounts of the Cthulhu Mythos might impart just a few points (+1 to +3 perhaps) while weighty records (like those immortalized in the infamous \i Necronomicon\i0 ) might offer the reader thorough and dangerous insight (+15 or more points of increase in \b Unnatural\b0 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.1\tab Finding Information\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If the \lquote tome\rquote  (or other information source) is hidden away or stored as part of a vast collection, Protagonists may need to exercise a range of skills to track it down. Or maybe interpersonal skills will allow them to get directions to it from people who are knowledgeable about the collection?\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.2\tab Accessing and Understanding the Contents\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If the item is expressed in a language other than the common vernacular, understanding it might require a relevant \lang3081\b Foreign Language\lang1033  \b0 test. This is especially true if the information is expressed in archaic or highly specialized language.\par
Other possibilities:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 If the knowledge locked up in the account is highly contextualized on esoteric systems of thought it might also require an \b Occult\b0  test. \par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 If it is so full of references back to antiquated knowledge that it can\rquote t readily be understood, perhaps a \b History\b0  test might be required. \par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 On the other hand, if the knowledge is closely tied to people, places, folklore and events from a particular corner of the globe then maybe a relevant \b Foreign Court/Kingdom\b0  test may be needed.\par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 If the knowledge assumes familiarity with the beliefs or practices of certain old traditions, it might need the \b Folklore\b0  skill to be tested.\par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 If there are frequent allusions or references to established religious catachisms, a test of the relevant \b Religion\b0  specialization might be needed to understand the deeper meaning.\par
\lang1024\f2\'b7\tab\lang3081\f1 If the information is written using a code a \b Ciphers\b0  test might be called for.\lang1033\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.3\tab Immersion\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 To the layperson, an account of the Cthulhu Mythos looks like nothing more than a random collection of disjointed thoughts, none of them imparting any real meaning. This is because most people have no prior experience of the Unnatural and thus have no reason to think that the gibbering ravings might be something meaningful.\par
If the Protagonist undertaking the research has an \b Unnatural\b0  skill rating of 0, he or she will be likewise unconvinced. Such an individual will be unable to become sufficiently \lquote immersed\rquote  in the account\rquote s buried secrets to learn anything useful at all.\par
On the other hand, a researcher with skill in \b Unnatural\b0  may be able to see beyond the disconnected rantings and perceive the implied secrets. This requires an \b Immersion test:\b0  a roll against the Protagonist\rquote s current \ul Unnatural skill \'d7 10\ulnone  with a negative modifier based on the account\rquote s weightiness (measured by the amount of potential additional Unnatural skill it may afford the cautious reader). \par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\pard\intbl Tome\rquote s Unnatural Skill Gain\cell Modifier to Immersion Test\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\pard\intbl +1 to +3\cell 0\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\pard\intbl +4 to +6\cell -10\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\pard\intbl +7 to +12\cell -20\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\pard\intbl +13 to +16\cell -30\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx1956\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3657\pard\intbl +17 or more\cell -40\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
If this roll fails, the researcher becomes convinced that the account is gibberish. No matter how many days or weeks he or she invests in studying it, that belief will prevent any deeper understanding of its contents.\par
If this roll is a \i critical success\i0 , the researcher becomes obsessed with the account \endash  and will want to pursue its analysis at all costs. This might present some difficult situations, but also means the research (see below) will be completed in \b half\b0  the normal time.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.4\tab Investing Time\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Delving into a weighty account of the Mythos might take months, especially if it is rendered in rambling and confusing language; on the other hand, the information might be presented in a form that only takes a few minutes to comprehend. You as Game Moderator should make a call as to the amount of time that a Protagonist must invest in order to properly appreciate the contents of the knowledge source \endash  in general, the more cryptic and voluminous, the longer it will take. Conceivably, some records featuring elliptical logic might take months to properly understand.\par
If the Game Moderator determines that some form of skill test is required to comprehend the information (e.g., if it is in a foreign language or recorded in a highly unorthodox way), that roll should only be allowed \i after\i0  the necessary research time has been invested. In general, it isn\rquote t necessary for the research process to be uninterrupted, but a long break might prove a setback which lengthens the overall task.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.5\tab Dangers of Understanding\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Lovecraft famously wrote that the most merciful thing in the world is mankind\rquote s inability to correlate all the pieces of knowledge at its disposal. It\rquote s this \ldblquote island of ignorance\rdblquote  that saves humanity from going insane from the realization of the true horrors underlying the world. Deliberately diving into the study of the hidden truth is a potentially perilous undertaking.\par
Revelations about terrible or shocking events or disgusting practices of Cthulhu Mythos entities or their followers, might warrant a \b SAN\b0  Loss.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.6\tab Skill Increases\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The main reason to unlock the hidden wisdom of Mythos accounts or other obscure knowledge-sources is to gain information that is relevant to the state of the current world or the scenario/campaign that is being played. In this regard, you as Game Moderator should reward successful research with some helpful details or facts which will aid in solving a problem or remaining alive in the broken world.\par
In addition to this, you might rule that the knowledge learned through research increases the Protagonist\rquote s skill ratings in some way. The most common \lquote reward\rquote  is an improvement to the \b Unnatural\b0  skill (which captures hidden knowledge about the Cthulhu Mythos and its attendant horrors). \par
A minor account might provide +5 skill points (or fewer) to Unnatural, while certain rare and shocking accounts might offer as much as +15. \par
When improving the Unnatural skill, don\rquote t forget that a Protagonist\rquote s Sanity cannot ever be higher than (99 minus the Unnatural skill rating). If changing this cap means current Sanity is too high, that number must also be reduced to match the new Maximum SAN.\par
In addition to learning about the Unnatural, successful research might improve other knowledge-based skills as well. For example:\par
\pard\fi-720\li1080\sa200\sl276\slmult1\lang3081\bullet\tab Information about obscure human beliefs might improve an \b Occult\b0  specialization\par
\bullet\tab Information about events or places from the distant past might improve \b History\b0\par
\bullet\tab Information about folklore specific to a geography might improve a \b Foreign Court/Kingdom\b0  specialization and/or the \b Folklore\b0  skill\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 More mundane knowledge might be learned as well, which improves Art, Craft, First Aid, Homeland, Quadrivium, Religion, Trivium, etc.\lang1033\par
Usually the amount of skill gained through such means will be variable and relatively small (e.g., 1D4 to 1D10).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.1.7\tab Learning Rituals\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Mythos accounts may also include descriptions of rituals which, if correctly performed, can create a supernatural effect. Rituals typically involve (potentially complex) patterns of action, chants, and associated paraphernalia. The manifestations created through rituals can be significant, but unlike magic in most tabletop roleplaying games such supernatural workings are laborious. They are typically time-consuming and may require the coordinated actions of a group of people to have any chance of succeeding. \par
Despite such inherent limitations, supernatural rituals represent perhaps the most powerful source of otherworldly influence which Protagonists (or their human adversaries) are ever likely to have under their control. As such there are some individuals who scour the world searching for tomes which can instruct them in such rituals. \par
When a Protagonist has successfully read a tome in its entirety you as Game Moderator should provide him or her with a list of any rituals it contains. Not every account contains rituals, and not every description of supernatural effects in an account is detailed enough to allow it to be reproduced. But for those that are present in such form, you should provide a sketchy description of what the ritual seems designed to do. This should be a description in vague game-world terms rather than in terms of game mechanics: \ldblquote seems designed to bring forth a shadow entity\rdblquote  is preferable to \ldblquote summons a Night-Gaunt\rdblquote .\par
A Protagonist might decide to attempt to study the specifics of a ritual described in a tome. If so, he or she will need to devote time and effort to that endeavor. This is \i in addition to\i0  the time spent researching the account itself and represents study that can only begin when its information has been consumed in full.\par
Exactly how much time is needed to study a given ritual depends on its complexity \endash  that is, whether it is considered \b Simple\b0 , \b Complex\b0 , or \b Elaborate. \b0 Typically, the more powerful the potential effects of a ritual, the more complex it will be.\par
\b Simple\b0  rituals take research of the order of \i hours or days\i0  to learn; \b Complex\b0  rituals can only be learned through the application of \i days or weeks\i0  of study; and \b Elaborate\b0  rituals can take \i weeks, months, or years\i0  to master. The time investment to learn a ritual does not have to be a single continuous block of research but can be split across many shorter periods of intense study.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Rolling to Learn A Ritual\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 If the Protagonist invests the requisite time, he or she will still need to make a roll at the end of the period to see whether the time invested paid off. The Protagonist must attempt a \b SAN\b0  roll \endash  and \i fail\i0  the roll \endash  to learn the ritual. \par
If the roll \b does not\b0  indicate a successful learning of the ritual, it means the Protagonist does not grasp the nuances required to master it. He or she can try again but will need to start from the beginning and again invest the same amount of time again before re-attempting the test. \par
If, on the other hand, the roll \b does\b0  indicate the Protagonist learned the ritual, he or she loses SAN. This is the price of internalizing unnatural truths about the universe and weird techniques for manipulating it. For \b Simple\b0  rituals, the Sanity loss should be modest (e.g., 1 point, 1D4, or 1D6); for \b Complex\b0  rituals a more substantial loss is warranted (e.g., 1D6, 1D8, or 1D10), while learning \b Elaborate\b0  rituals will always be damaging to Sanity (e.g., 1D10, 1D12, or 1D20 point loss). Learning an Elaborate ritual \i also\i0  grants a Protagonist +1 percentile in the \b Unnatural\b0  skill.\par
Once a ritual has been successfully learned, the Protagonist may attempt to perform it (see below).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Mythos Accounts With Multiple Rituals\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 Some written accounts, in particular so-called \lquote grimoires\rquote , contain descriptions of many different supernatural rituals. Learning rituals from such sources requires each effort to be attempted separately, using the method described above.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s4\sb40\sl276\slmult1\cf1\i\f0 Keeping Failed Rolls Secret\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\i0\f1 The Game Moderator may choose to keep the SAN roll made at the conclusion of a research attempt secret from the player. If the outcome is a clear success or failure the Protagonist should recognize it as such, but if the roll was a marginal success or failure the Game Moderator might choose to tell the player that the Protagonist \i believes\i0  he or she has memorized all the subtleties but is not 100% sure. The only way to know for certain is to attempt the ritual \endash  and if the learning attempt was a failure, such an attempt will never properly succeed. Although it may still generate an unintended supernatural effect.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 9.2\tab Performing Rituals\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The specific actions, chants, and paraphernalia required to successfully perform a ritual are particular to each and should be designed as part of the ritual\rquote s description.\par
Any attempt to carry out a ritual without the necessary knowledge or components is doomed to failure \'85 although it is possible that flawed ritual activities might still generate some kind of supernatural effect, just not the one intended by the person conducting the ritual. The Game Moderator should use his or her judgement to determine any such random supernatural side-effects; they should almost always be dangerous and detrimental to those involved.\par
In terms of game mechanics, the successful performance of a ritual (once the correct pieces are in place) is achieved via an investment of time/effort, the sacrifice of points in one or more game attribute (usually Willpower Points), and a successful Ritual Activation Test (see below). If all these steps are successfully achieved, the supernatural effects of the ritual will manifest.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.2.1\tab Time Invested in the Ritual\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The amount of time required to perform a ritual depends on its complexity rating \endash  \b Simple\b0 , \b Complex\b0 , or \b Elaborate\b0 .\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Simple\b0  rituals are relatively quick to carry out, requiring somewhere between a turn and a minute.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Complex\b0  rituals are more time-consuming, needing somewhere between a few minutes and an hour.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Elaborate\b0  rituals are serious undertakings, consuming anything from a few hours to a day or maybe more.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 During the time taken to perform a ritual, assume that all participants are completely occupied (chanting, carrying out prescribed actions, using paraphernalia in particular ways). A short interruption might not destroy the momentum of the ritual but a longer break likely will.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.2.2\tab Powering the Ritual\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The description of a ritual should outline the type and number of personal attribute points that must be sacrificed to provide mental energies that fuel the supernatural effect.\par
The most common form of sacrifice is Willpower Points \endash  to create relatively minor effects might only require 5 or 6 WPs; a substantial effect might require 15; a vastly powerful effect might require 30; and a truly cosmic-level effect might need 100 or more WPs. \par
\pard When a Protagonist makes a deliberate sacrifice of WPs, check to see whether the new total carries any effect upon him or her (see \b WILLPOWER POINTS\b0 , page \lang3081 46\lang1033 ). In particular, remember that reaching a WP total of 1 or 2 indicates a mental collapse of some kind, and reaching 0 WP causes unconsciousness.\par
Whenever a sacrifice of WP is called for, a participant in the ritual may always choose to sacrifice points of permanent POW instead \endash  each such point is equivalent to 10 WPs for the purposes of fueling a ritual. Such sacrificed points do not refresh, but Protagonists can attempt \b DOWNTIME\b0  activities to try to get some back (see page \lang3081 80\lang1033 ) \par
Some rituals also call for a sacrifice of Hit Points, either from the participants or from elsewhere (animal, human, or other living entity). Note that Protagonists who knowingly harm another person, or even cruelly harm or kill an animal are likely to be subject to Sanity loss due to \b VIOLENCE\b0  (see page \lang3081 70\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Depending on the nature of the specific ritual, it may be possible for several people to cooperate in the performance. For especially large effects this may be the only way to generate enough mental energies. While the leader of the ritual must have learned it in full (using the process described in the previous section), helpers can be instructed through simple notes and rote learning. Each assistant chooses for themselves how many points of attributes they will sacrifice. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.2.3\tab The Ritual Activation Test\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 If the requisite amount of time has been devoted to the ritual and the necessary number of attribute points sacrificed, the individual leading the performance may make a roll to see if the effort was ultimately successful.\par
Successfully activating a ritual depends on the ritual leader\rquote s Sanity, but success is more likely the \i lower\i0  that number. The \b Ritual Activation Test\b0  is a SAN test that must be \i failed\i0  for the ritual to work as planned. \par
If the roll indicates the ritual did \i not\i0  work, all the chanting and ceremony has been for naught. The ritual leader has two options \endash  he or she can either:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Abandon the ritual:\b0  nothing supernatural happens at all, and half of the sacrificed points are returned to all participants; or\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Force a connection\b0  to the supernatural: this involves the leader personally sacrificing 1 POW permanently to turn a failed roll to a successful one. The ritual effects happen after all, despite the roll. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 9.2.4\tab Sanity Costs to Ritual Participants\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 The simple act of being involved in a supernatural ritual performance is damaging to a character\rquote s Sanity, regardless of whether the ritual was successful or not.\par
If the performance was completed but something went awry (e.g., insufficient mental energy was raised, or the Ritual Activation Test indicated the effort was fruitless), all participants suffer an automatic SAN loss. For rituals intended to create small effects this will be modest, perhaps just 1 SAN point; if attempting a substantial supernatural effect, the loss is 1D4; if attempting a vastly powerful effect it might be 1D6; and for a cosmic effect it might be 1D20.\par
On the other hand, if the ritual succeeded and the supernatural effect is generated it is quite likely that the experience of witnessing something bizarre created by one\rquote s own actions will damage each participants Sanity. The precise losses should reflect the effect that is created, as described by the spell description. As a guideline, a minor supernatural effect might warrant a SAN loss of 1 point, a substantial one might be worth 1D8, a vast effect might lead to a loss of 1D12, and a truly cosmic manifestation might cause a Sanity loss of anything up to 1D100. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 9.3\tab Objects with Unnatural Power\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 As Game Moderator, you may wish to include in your game items with the power to create supernatural effects reminiscent of those wrought through rituals. Using such an item does not require any special training or learning, and no Ritual Activation Test is needed. The user of an object with supernatural powers may, however, still need to sacrifice attribute points to fuel the effect (as per the GM\rquote s description of the item) and might suffer SAN loss from the experience.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb240\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 10.0\tab Supernatural Effects\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 There are lots of weird, supernatural things that can happen in your game of \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 . In most cases, the style of weirdness and its scope of effect should be tied to the specific setting, or the current adventure/campaign/plotline being played out. As such \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  doesn\rquote t provide a ready-made catalogue of supernatural rituals and effects to plunder. Effects should relate to significant plot points or elements of the setting rather than being generic RPG \lquote spells\rquote .\par
The following guidelines may be helpful to Game Moderators inventing custom supernatural powers for their own game.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb120\sa120\cf2\b\f0 Designing Supernatural Effects: General Principles\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 Supernatural effects in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  are unlike the forms of magic that appear in most roleplaying games, especially games set in the fantasy genre. Rather than wielding a flashy fireball into the midst of combat, a ritual magician in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  might create a supernatural effect as the result of hours of ritual incantation placing his or her mind into communion with extradimensional horrors.\par
The following general guidelines will help you in depicting magic in a suitably low\u8208?key and creepy fashion:\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Supernatural Effects are seldom flashy:\b0  while some spells might create a spectacular if shocking manifestation of unnatural horror, most work with little or no visible or physical effect. Frequently, people who aim to unleash supernatural effects have no way to tell whether their ritual succeeded or not, until hours, days, or even weeks have passed. And even then, its effects may be subtle changes that most people would never notice.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Supernatural Effects are usually time\u8208?consuming to create:\b0  many supernatural effects require lengthy rituals which are repetitious and wearying to perform. While there are a handful of smaller, casual effects which might be useful in a tactical, fast\u8208?paced situation, most play out far too slowly to help in tactical environments.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Supernatural Effects are \i ALWAYS\i0  dangerous to invoke:\b0  generating a supernatural effect is equivalent to opening one\rquote s mind and essence to the unknowable forces which make up the Cthulhu Mythos. These powers are inherently corrosive to reality as we know it. So, coming into direct mental or physical connection with them always causes some form of lasting damage to the spellcaster, and maybe others as well.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-357\li714\sa120\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 Supernatural Effects are the enemy of Sanity:\b0  Connecting with the forces of the Mythos is inherently dangerous to one\rquote s Sanity. In game terms this manifests as a mandatory sacrifice of SAN; but in narrative terms you should play up the highly disturbing experience of touching an unknown and unknowable extra\u8208?dimensional force whose very existence is anathema to everything that the caster has ever known or experienced. Generating supernatural effects should hurt. Every single time.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 10.1\tab Calculating the Scope of the Supernatural Effect\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The manifestations associated with a supernatural effect can be virtually anything the Game Moderator can imagine. Where such effects require game mechanics, these can be designed on a case-by-case basis.\par
For determining the attribute cost of a ritual, as well as its potential for creating Sanity losses, it is useful to gauge the overall \lquote magnitude of the effect being generated \endash  this is termed the \b scope\b0  of the effect. For convenience, a scale of eight scope ratings (from least to greatest) is shown below, along with a representative Willpower Point cost for fueling effects at each rating.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Supernatural Effect Scope\cell Indicative WP Cost\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Minor\cell 6\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Small\cell 9\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Significant\cell 12\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Substantial\cell 15\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Major\cell 22 (or 12 WP + 1 POW)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Vast\cell 30 (or 10 WP + 2 POW)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Sweeping\cell 45 (or 15 WP + 3 POW)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2665\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5245\pard\intbl Cosmic\cell 110 (or 10 WP + 10 POW)\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
The scope of an effect is based on how sweeping a change it causes to the physical (or mental) world. The sections which follow give guidelines regarding how specific types of effects might be rated using this scale. \par
One basic factor for consideration is the \b range\b0  of the supernatural effect (i.e., how far from the ritual site the effect manifests). Generally, it is much easier to create effects nearby and harder to influence reality a long distance away. The table below gives a rough guide.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3374\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5216\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5500\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Range of Effect\cell Base Scope Rating\cell\cell Range of Effect\cell Base Scope Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3374\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5216\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Nearby (10 m away)\cell Minor\cell\cell Global (anywhere on Earth)\cell Major\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3374\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5216\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Local (100m away)\cell Small\cell\cell Beyond earth, but within our galaxy\cell Vast\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3374\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5216\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Line of Sight (1km away)\cell Significant\cell\cell In another galaxy\cell Sweeping\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx3374\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5216\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5500\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx8550\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10687\pard\intbl Distant (100km away)\cell Substantial\cell\cell In a separate dimension\cell Cosmic\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
Use these base scope ratings as a starting point, adapting them according to the criteria specific to different effect types as shown on the next page. Wherever multiple criteria apply, always pick the greater of the two possible scope ratings (e.g., if one criterion suggests a Significant rating and another a Vast rating, the scope of the effect is actually Vast).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 10.2\tab Common Types of Effects\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 As Game Moderator you\rquote re free to invent any type of supernatural effect that complements your game world. For settings which emulate the styles of otherworldly phenomena found in H.P. Lovecraft\rquote s fiction, a few common categories of effects may prove useful starting points for broader invention. \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.1\tab Summoning Supernatural Entities\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 In many Lovecraftian settings there exist a family of rituals designed to compel a supernatural being of the Cthulhu Mythos to manifest at the location where the ritual is performed. The specific details of the chants and actions that must be performed to achieve this outcome vary according to the type of creature to be \b summoned\b0 .\par
In determining the Scope rating for this supernatural effect, the most pertinent factor is the POW characteristic of the supernatural creature summoned. \par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl POW of Supernatural Entity\cell Scope Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 1\emdash 8 \cell Minor\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 9\emdash 12\cell Small\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 13\emdash 16\cell Significant\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 17\emdash 20\cell Substantial\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 21\emdash 30\cell Major\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 31\emdash 40\cell Vast\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 41\emdash 60\cell Sweeping\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 61\emdash 150 \cell Cosmic\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.2\tab Binding Supernatural Entities\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Another category of rituals found in many Lovecraftian settings are those compelling a supernatural creature of the Cthulhu Mythos to obey the will of the ritual leader (at least for a period of time). This control is called \b binding\b0 . As with summoning, the Scope of such an effect is governed primarily by the POW of the creature \endash  use the table above. Binding spells which have a long duration (more than a day) may warrant a higher Scope rating than that mentioned on the table.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.3\tab Mental Contact With Alien Gods\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 While the Cthulhu Mythos includes numerous races of supernatural creatures, the major Powers are more properly thought of as individual alien \lquote gods\rquote . This includes vastly powerful entities that are trapped in obscure places on our planet (like Cthulhu) through to cosmic forces that define our very reality (like Azathoth).\par
Certain insane sorcerers have at different points in history devised rituals to make mental contact with one of these vast unknowable intelligences. In determining the rating for the scope of such an effect the primary consideration is the potency of the Alien God.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Magnitude of Alien God\cell Scope Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Minor (e.g., Nodens)\cell Substantial\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Major (e.g., Dagon)\cell Vast\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Significant (e.g., Cthulhu)\cell Sweeping\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Cosmic (e.g., Azathoth, Yog-Sothoth)\cell Cosmic\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.4\tab Opening Physical Conduits to Alien Gods\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Some sorcerers are not content with communing with the vast and corrosive intelligences of the Alien Gods, but instead wish to open conduits for their physical avatars to enter our reality.\par
Again, the primary consideration in determining scope is the potency of the Alien God, although the act of opening a physical conduit is at least one step greater in scope than merely communicating telepathically.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Magnitude of Alien God\cell Scope Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Minor (e.g., Nodens)\cell Major\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Major (e.g., Dagon)\cell Sweeping\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Significant (e.g., Cthulhu)\cell Cosmic\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Cosmic (e.g., Azathoth, Yog-Sothoth)\cell Cosmic\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.5\tab Dimensional Traversal\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Lovecraftian settings often incorporate the idea of extra-dimensional locales, whether remote parts of our own universe, realms created by the collective human unconscious mind, or entirely different dimensions. Stories set in such worlds may involve a myriad of different supernatural effects that permit mere mortals to cross the barrier between the normal (ravaged) world and one such outside region.\par
In determining the scope of an effect which allows dimensional traversal, consider the distances involved. Use the range table provided above, re-imagining the range values as referring instead to the distance traversed. \par
\par
\par
\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.6\tab Cursing and Damaging\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 Although far less common than in traditional tabletop roleplaying games, supernatural effects may exist in Lovecraftian settings which directly inflict physical harm on individuals. The scope for such an effect can be estimated by considering the amount of physical damage which may be potentially inflicted, usually represented by a dice value or Lethality rating.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl Damage Inflicted\cell Scope Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 1D4 \cell Minor\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 1D6\cell Small\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 1D10\cell Significant\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 1D20\cell Substantial\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 10% Lethality\cell Major\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 20% Lethality\cell Vast\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 40% Lethality\cell Sweeping\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2807\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4224\pard\intbl 99% Lethality \cell Cosmic\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s3\fi-720\li720\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0 10.2.7\tab Warding and Protection\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1 As counterpoint to supernatural effects which may cause physical harm, it is equally possible for supernatural effects to exist which protect individuals from such harm. When estimating the scope of such an effect, consider the worst or most-serious type of damage the effect is likely to mitigate and consult the table from the previous section.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\pagebb\s1\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 PART III: \caps Game Building Resources\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\caps0\f1\fs22 While the rules presented in this System Reference Document provide a fully-playable (if generic) tabletop roleplaying game, they are designed to also serve as the rules foundation for future games. Several resources are collected here which may assist with the design and definition of such games.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 11.0\tab Designing New Archetypes\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Section 2.5 describes a representative selection of Protagonist Archetypes suitable for games set in the \lang3081 Medieval Era\lang1033 . While these are varied enough to support a wide range of character types, situations will inevitably arise where none of the pre-defined Archetypes meets the needs of describing a class of Protagonists or NPCs important to the setting.\par
When this happens, the best solution is to simply create a new Archetype \endash  which is fortunately not difficult.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 11.1\tab Archetype Building in a Nutshell\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The notes below give a set of helpful guidelines that can assist in making the design choices that define a brand-new Archetype. However, at its simplest, the mechanical process of defining an Archetype is very simple. Each Archetype needs:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 a suitable \b Name\b0  that embodies a character type befitting the setting;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 one or two \b Recommended Statistics\b0  that should ideally be higher than average for characters of that Archetype;\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 a starting \b Number of Bonds\b0  (usually between 2 and 5);\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 a \b Starting Resources\b0  rating (usually between 2 and 5);\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 a set of \b Skills\b0  which have a starting value higher than the usual base rating for the setting.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 For the last three items, there is a simple system to \ldblquote balance out\rdblquote  different Archetypes. Each has a budget of 800 points that can be spent as per the table below:\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trqc\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5812\pard\intbl\b Archetype Feature\cell Points Cost\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trqc\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5812\pard\intbl\b0 For each Starting Bond slot\cell 50 points\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trqc\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5812\pard\intbl For each point rating in Starting Resources\cell 50 points\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trqc\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5812\pard\intbl For each +1 raise to a skill\rquote s starting value, above the base value for the skill in this setting\cell 1 point\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trqc\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx5812\pard\intbl For each Archetype, there is a total budget of 800 points.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 11.2\tab Step 1 \endash  Defining the Archetype Concept\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Before diving into the specifics of building game-mechanics for your new Archetype concept, it is worth spending some time making sure the idea is built around a clear concept. How is this Archetype going to be different from others already defined for the setting? In what ways is it filling a gap that none of the existing Archetypes can cover? Is the idea too specific to one situation \endash  and could be broadened out to cover a related category of character types? Or is it too abstract, and in need of refinement to bring it back to something that others will intuitively recognize as an appropriate category of characters for this setting? Having a good concept in mind will make everything that follows much easier, so don\rquote t rush your thinking about the core concept.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 11.3\tab Step 2 \endash  Picking Recommended Statistics\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Each Archetype usually has one or two recommended Statistics that should (ideally) be higher-than-average for characters of that Archetype. Picking these is usually a matter of simple extrapolation from your core concept. Is the Archetype largely driven by knowledge? Then maybe INT should be in the list somewhere. Are individuals of the Archetype defined by their abilities to socialize or establish rapport with other people? Then CHA should definitely be in the list somewhere. If the character type is all about exercising sheer brawn, maybe STR is appropriate \'85 or alternatively if they\rquote re all about fine manipulation or skulking in the shadows, perhaps DEX is a suitable choice. There aren\rquote t too many character types which revolve around healthiness and fortitude, but if yours does maybe you could consider adding CON to the list. It\rquote s fine for your archetype to have just a single recommended statistic, or a couple. More than two is unlikely.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 11.4\tab Step 3 \endash  Starting Bonds and Starting Resources\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Each Archetype needs a starting number of Bonds and a starting Resources rating. Of the budget of 800 points, each Bond slot costs 50 and each rating level in Resources costs 50. A starting point for designing an Archetype is to consider a value of 3 starting bonds and 3 starting resources \endash  this reflects an \ldblquote average\rdblquote  situation for characters; tweak this as seems appropriate.\par
If your concept for the new Archetype is something that has a wide network of contacts, the initial number of Bonds could be 4 or even 5. Each additional bond will, however, reduce the budget of points available for elevating skills so having an extensive network comes with a cost. Some Archetypes are inherently loners: for them, having a smaller number of starting Bonds (perhaps only 2) captures that insular nature and leaves some additional points for resources or skills, depending on your concept for the Archetype. Creating an Archetype with fewer than 2 starting Bonds risks forcing characters into being cut-off from the world around them, and is not usually realistic.\par
For a few rare cases, an Archetype might inherently have one bond that is higher than the normal starting value. If your basic concept inherently places the individual in a leadership role (e.g., your Archetype is supposed to be a local religious leader), it\rquote s ok to add a note that says one of the starting bonds will have a rating value of at least 10. This is usually only meaningful for community bonds.\par
Each Archetype also needs a starting Resources value. Think about how many assets the poorest member of the character type might have access to. If they might be a pauper (at least in terms of access to items), maybe consider a low starting Resources score (perhaps a 2, or in extreme cases a 1). On the other hand, if members of the Archetype would typically have ready access to lots of equipment or assets, a value of 4 or 5 might be worth considering. Don\rquote t forget that during the character generation process, it will be possible to sacrifice skill picks to elevate these base ratings, so leaving a rating at a low level doesn\rquote t necessarily mean that every character created using the new Archetype will have a below-average set of items to draw on: it\rquote s only those who choose not to further sacrifice skill picks that will have a small pool of items to draw on. Making the starting Resources value too high will significantly restrict the number of skills that the Archetype will have at an elevated level. (So, while it would be possible to set your Archetype\rquote s starting Resources at an impressive score of 12, that would use up 600 of the 800 points in the budget, leaving nothing much for skill enhancement; so characters of that Archetype would all universally \ldblquote wealthier-than-most\rdblquote  but lacking in any specific skill. This isn\rquote t usually an interesting choice.)\par
Once you\rquote ve decided on the appropriate number of starting Bonds and starting Resources rating, multiply both numbers by 50 and subtract them from the starting budget of 800. Whatever is left is available for spending on skills.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 11.5\tab Step 4 \endash  Skills With Elevated Starting Ratings\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 As described on page \lang3081 31\lang1033 , each skill has a base rating which every character has as a starting value, regardless of their Archetype. For skills that are directly related to the main activities of an Archetype, the beginning rating will be higher to reflect specialized training and/or experience gained through undertaking tasks particular to the Archetype. These elevated starting scores are purchased on a 1-for-1 basis, trading 1 point from the Archetype build budget for a +1 bump in one skill, above its base value. So, if the normal base value for \b Search\b0  is 20 and your concept for the Archetype suggests its members should have a Search value beginning at 50, you would spend 30 points (50 minus 20) from the budget to achieve that goal.\par
It is traditional to spend points in blocks of 10 (i.e., 10, 20, 30, etc.) to ensure that the Archetype\rquote s starting skill ratings remain a neat multiple of 10, although ignoring that convention won\rquote t break anything from a game mechanics perspective.\par
When deciding on which skills to elevate for your Archetype, it is best to think about the common types of tasks that members of the Archetype would perform often \ul\i in their professional duties\ulnone\i0 , or things would generally be assumed to be good at. \par
It not unusual for an Archetype\rquote s core concept to strongly suggest a half-dozen or so skills which every member of the archetype would excel at, and a larger list of skills which some \endash  but not necessarily all \endash  members would have as a specialty. It is easy to manage this situation by developing two lists:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 A list of core skills, universally relevant to every member of the Archetype \endash  usually this won\rquote t be more than about six skills; and\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 A list of skills which seem like good contenders to be optional specializations for the Archetype.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 First you can spend most (but not all) of the available points from the budget to increase the starting rating of \i every\i0  skill on the core skill list, remembering:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 The points cost is the amount you raise the starting value ABOVE the normal base.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 There\rquote s usually diminishing value in increasing a skill\rquote s starting value above 70 or 80 since success is likely and the points might be better spent on elevating another lower-valued skill instead.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 It\rquote s not usually beneficial to elevate a core skill by a tiny amount \endash  anything less than a 30-point nudge for a core skill will feel like you\rquote re short-changing an important part of the Archetype concept.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 No skill under any circumstance can ever be higher than 99%.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 Once you\rquote ve got most of the points spent on upgrading the core list, divide whatever\rquote s left into blocks of 30 or 40 points and specify that the Archetype\rquote s skills also include a certain number of picks from your list of optional specializations, with each pick giving that same block-size of elevation to the chosen skill. So, for example, if you were left with 80 points in the budget after core skills had been elevated, you could decide that the Archetype also includes a choice of two skills from your list of possible specializations with each choice elevating the selected skill to a starting value of base plus 40. Alternatively, if there were 90 points left instead you might decide to offer three picks with each offering a 30-point boost over base.\par
If using this structure to provide a level of customization for the Archetype, you should ensure that there\rquote s a good selection of skills to choose from \endash  ideally there should about \i twice\i0  as many options in the list as there are skill picks on offer, to allow plenty of options for diversifying characters. [So, for example, if you\rquote re allowing four picks from the optional specializations list, try to ensure the list has about eight skills to choose from.] \par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 12.0\tab Translating Creatures from D100 Games\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Game Moderators may find statistics for horrific creatures and supernatural effects in the rules or supplements published for other D100 Lovecraftian horror RPGs. The general-purpose guidelines below give some assistance with converting creature-related statistics for use in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 .\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 In most cases, converting horrific creatures found in other D100 games for use in a \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  game is straightforward. A seven-step process for carrying out such conversions is described below.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 1: Convert Statistics\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 As described on page \lang3081 9\lang1033 , characters and other creatures in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  are principally described in terms of six core capabilities: Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, Intelligence, Power, and Charisma. These are measured on a scale of approximately 3\emdash 18 for a human being. Most D100 games use a similar set of characteristics although the seventh edition of the world\rquote s oldest Lovecraftian roleplaying game chooses to instead measure a character\rquote s core statistics on a 1\emdash 100 scale.\par
If the creature or character being translated has game statistics for anything other than the previously mentioned seventh edition game, the translation is simple:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Strength (sometimes STR) becomes the creature or character\rquote s Strength statistic in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 ; \par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 Constitution (CON), Intelligence (INT), Dexterity (DEX), and Power (POW), all become the identically named statistic in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 ; and\par
\f2\'b7\tab\f1 If a creature/character has a listed Appearance (APP) rating, that translates to its Charisma (CHA) in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 . \par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1 When translating statistics from the aforementioned seventh edition game, the process is effectively the same, but each number is divided by 5 during the translation (e.g., a CON of 65 for a seventh edition creature would translate to a \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Constitution statistic of 13).\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 If the creature or character has a listed Sanity (SAN) score, that same number becomes their SAN score in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 2: Derive Hit Points and Will Points (and optionally Resources)\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 In \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  two key game attributes, Hit Points and Will Points, are derived from the core statistics. The formulae for deriving these may be found in the section on creating Protagonists, on page \lang3081 11\lang1033 . Once the core statistics have been translated for the Mythos creature or character, these should be calculated exactly as described in the Protagonist generation process.\par
When translating human characters (as opposed to creatures) it may be important for the Game Moderator to be able to gauge how well-resourced the character is. In that situation, scanning through the list of Archetypes (starting on page \lang3081 12\lang1033 ), the Game Moderator can see which most closely relates to the character\rquote s role \endash  the base Resources attribute score for the character can be assumed to be the same as that Archetype. This can be modified up or down by the Game Moderator to reflect a vision for the character\rquote s material \lquote wealth\rquote .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 3: Deriving Sanity Loss\par
\pard\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 For games which list explicit sanity losses for witnessing Cthulhu Mythos horrors, those same sanity losses can be applied in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 . For games which do not include specific game mechanics for mental stability, use the table on page \lang3081 71\lang1033  to pick an equivalent sanity loss based on how disturbing and/or disgusting a creature is described as being.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 4: Deriving Skills\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 All D100-based games measure skill proficiency of a person or creature on a scale of 0\emdash 100, the same scale used by \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 . So, any skill scores assigned as part of the game statistics for another game can be carried across without the need for any arithmetic. However, each different game uses its own list of skills, each of them a variant way of carving the broad field of human knowledge and abilities into different categorizations. Thus, in converting game statistics from another RPG to \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 , it\rquote s necessary to decide which \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skill most closely relates to each skill named in the source stat-block.\par
There are four situations that can arise:\par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1\b 1.\tab Obvious Match:\b0  The skill named in the source stat-block has an obvious counterpart in the \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skill list. In this case, simply give the person or creature the corresponding \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skill with the same percentile rating assigned to the original skill.\par
\b 2.\tab Multiple Match:\b0  The skill named in the source stat-block has similarities with several different \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skills. In this case, you can either pick one of the \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skills (ideally the most relevant) and assign all the original skill\rquote s percentile rating to that skill, or you can split up the percentiles among multiple \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skills.\par
\b 3.\tab Clash:\b0  Sometimes during the translation of many different skill ratings, it will occur that several different foreign-game skills all translate to the same \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  skill. In that case, the person or creature\rquote s percentile rating in that skill should be the \b\i highest\b0\i0  of all the different skills that translate to that skill.\par
\b 4.\tab Novelty Skill:\b0  Some games like to include silly or oddly specific skills (like \ldblquote bake cookies\rdblquote  or \ldblquote defuse nuclear bomb\rdblquote ). You can either ignore these skills altogether or carry them across as similar \lquote additional skills\rquote  (i.e., presume the existence of a cookie baking skill in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 , whose definition you can make up as needed).\par
\pard References to a rating in the \ldblquote Cthulhu Mythos\rdblquote  skill used in other games should all be carried across to \i Cthulhu Eternal\rquote s\i0  \b Unnatural\b0  skill (see page \lang3081 40\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 5: Deriving Attacks\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Every D100-based game describes the basic attributes of an offensive capability (or attack) in terms of a percentage chance that the attack will hit its target, plus a dice roll to determine the HP damage that the attack inflicts.\par
\pard When converting a stat-block to \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 , each attack mode will typically map to a similar or equivalent weapon skill with the same percentile rating. Damage ratings (die rolls) can either be carried across unchanged, or if the attack mode obviously relates to one of the weapons listed in the examples on page \lang3081 54\lang1033 , you can just use the \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  damage rating for the listed weapon. Where the damage die listed in the source stat-block mention adding a \ldblquote Damage Bonus\rdblquote , consult the material on page \lang3081 52\lang1033  to see whether the \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  attack should also include the equivalent bonus. \par
If converting a stat-block for a creature \endash  especially a large creature, or one with a STR well outside the normal human range \endash  it is probably better to forget about Damage Bonus altogether. Many D100-based games give such massive monstrosities equally massive Damage Bonuses (+3D6 and above): \i Cthulhu Eternal\rquote s\i0  combat system doesn\rquote t seek to model overwhelming damage by means of large pools of dice \endash  instead, it uses the Lethality mechanic. Consider setting the total damage rating of such a creature\rquote s attacks based on its \i overall\i0  damage rating in the source system \endash  that is, the attack\rquote s base damage \i plus\i0  the creature\rquote s stated Damage Bonus. If that total is no-more than 2 dice, then simply set the \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  damage rating for the attack equal to that.   \par
If the foreign-game attack mode lists more than 2 dice to roll for damage overall, it is likely that it would be better to represent the damage in terms of a Lethality rating. The table below gives some approximate translations:\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl Multiple-Dice Damage\cell Lethality Rating\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl 3D6\cell 9%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl 3D8\cell 12%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl 3D10\cell 15%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl For each +1D6\cell +3%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl For each +1D8\cell +4%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4536\pard\intbl For each +1D10\cell +5%\cell\row\pard\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 6: Deriving Armor value\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Creatures or individuals who have innate protection from damage, or who wear protective equipment may have an Armor value as part of their original statistic block. They may also have a description of the particular type of armor.\par
Armor values from D100-based games can be directly translated across \endash  for example, a Mythos creature with an innate Armor of 2 will have the same Armor rating in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 .\par
\pard An alternate method of assigning an Armor value for worn protection is to consult the table in \b ARMORED\b0  (page \lang3081 57\lang1033 ), locating a roughly-equivalent type of protective equipment and use the Armor value shown in the table.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 Step 7: Defining Special Powers and Defenses\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Perhaps the hardest part of converting stat-blocks for creatures (and sometimes human beings) to \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 , is translating special powers and defenses, including unusual modes of attack. These are sometimes written in a manner that is specific to the game-mechanics for the source system.\par
\pard\sa120\sl276\slmult1 There are two basic approaches to converting special powers: \par
\pard\fi-360\li720\sa200\sl276\slmult1 1.\tab finding a similar power already possessed by a creature with \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  stats, or \par
2.\tab converting the individual game mechanics underlying the power into \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  concepts piece-by-piece.\par
\pard For determining appropriate \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  game-statistics to cover special defenses, a good place to start is considering the categories of Defenses described in \b PROTECTION IN COMBAT\b0 , page \lang3081 56\lang1033 . These are: Fragile, Exposed, Armored, Huge, and Transcendent. \par
Furthermore, some creatures have physical forms that are less susceptible to Lethal damage: the box nearby summarizes different levels of protection that the Game Moderator can assign to otherworldly monstrosities.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb120\sa120\cf2\b\f0 Reduced Susceptibility to Lethal Damage\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 The following common forms of protection against Lethal attacks may be assigned to creatures/individuals which are harder to kill than normal humans.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-360\li720\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 RESILIENT:\b0  A successful roll on a Lethal attack does not kill the creature/individual but inflicts Hit Point damage equal to 2D10 minus any Armor rating.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 RESILIENT TO <attack type, e.g., Firearms>:\b0  If attacked with other attack types than the one named, damage/lethality is as per normal. If attacked with Lethal attacks of the nominated type, a successful roll does not kill the creature/individual but inflicts Hit Point damage equal to 2D10 minus any Armor rating.\par
\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 PARTIALLY IMMUNE (less than <number, e.g., 20>%): \b0 If the Lethal attack has a Lethality rating less than or equal to the number mentioned, it cannot harm or kill the target \endash  even a successful Lethality roll will cause it zero harm. For Lethal attacks with a Lethality rating \i higher\i0  than the number mentioned, the creature/individual is still not automatically killed on a successful Lethality roll but suffers Hit Point damage equal to 2D10 minus any Armor rating.\par
\pard\intbl\fi-357\li714\sa120\f2\'b7\tab\b\f1 IMMUNE:\b0  Is not affected at all any physical attacks, including Lethal attacks.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb120\sa120\cf2\b\f0 Some Example Special Attacks\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 During a translation the GM might need to invent game statistics for special forms of attacks. The following examples provide some example powers that can be used or adapted as needed.\par
\b Blood Drain:\b0  The bite of the entity drains blood from the victim each turn until forcibly detached. For each turn of blood loss, the victim loses 1D6 STR. If STR reaches zero the victim dies, however if he or she survives the attack, it will be slowly regained at the rate determined by the Game Moderator.\par
\b Cling & Bite: \b0 After the entity bites a victim, it will cling to it unless forcibly removed. Each subsequent turn inflicts a further 1D3 Hit Points of damage to the victim.\par
\b Engulf Victims:\b0  If a victim is pulled into the entity\rquote s mass it becomes absorbed within it. An individual trapped inside the entity must separately make an \b opposed test\b0  comparing his or her \b STR\'d75\b0  against the entity\rquote s \b STR\'d75\b0 . If the test is failed, the victim takes Lethal Damage with rating equal to 1% \'d7 the entity\rquote s CON. Trapped targets inside the entity find it difficult to move or attack: only by making a percentile roll below their \b STR\'d75\b0  can such individuals make an attack while inside the entity.\par
\b Mental Drain:\b0  If the entity wishes to mentally weaken those in its proximity, it can compel an individual to perform an \b opposed test\b0  which matches the entity\rquote s \b POW\'d75\b0  versus the victim\rquote s \b INT\'d75\b0 . If the victim is defeated in this test, he or she immediately loses 1D6 Willpower Points + 1D6 SAN. The WPs are added to the attacker\rquote s total.\par
\b Tentacle Constrict/Crush:\b0  If one of the entity\rquote s tentacles successfully strikes an enemy it will wrap around it and continue to crush it in later turns. Unless freed by external means, the victim will continue to suffer Hit Point damage equal to half the normal attack damage in each succeeding turn.\par
\b Tentacle Grapple:\b0  If the tentacle of the entity strikes a victim it wraps itself around a limb, effectively \b PINNING\b0  the target (see page \lang3081 49\lang1033 ). Being held in this way does not inflict any Hit Point damage but the victim is effectively unable to take any actions until he or she is freed. The entity can use its other attacks against victims held by its tentacle. Breaking free from the entity\rquote s grip requires success in an \b opposed test\b0  pitting the entity\rquote s \b STR\'d75\b0  against the victim\rquote s \b STR\'d75\b0 .\par
\pard\intbl\sa120\b Toxic Venom: \b0 The bite of the entity injects a potent toxin with a Lethality Rating equal to the entity\rquote s CON.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb120\sa120\cf2\b\f0 Some Example Special Abilities\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 During a translation the GM might need to invent game statistics for special abilities that aren\rquote t attacks but still provide the creature or person with an advantage. The following examples provide a few ideas that can be used or adapted as needed.\par
\b Hypnotize:\b0  The entity\rquote s gaze can render a victim in a trance-like state. When a victim locks eyes with the entity, he or she makes an \b opposed POW\'d75 vs POW\'d75\b0  test with it. If the target loses, a hypnotic state quickly descends. Humans controlled in this way will always follow simple instructions. If the commands are inherently self-destructive or injurious to the controlled person, an \b INT\'d75\b0  roll can be attempted at the beginning of each turn \endash  success means the person snaps out of the trance.\b\fs21\par
Invisible: \b0 The entity has the power to become invisible to normal vision through a supernatural effect; attempts to hit the entity while it is invisible are \i halved\i0 .\b\fs22\par
Mental Control:\b0  The entity has the power to control humans via mental dominance. Resolve such attempts as an \b opposed POW\'d75 vs POW\'d75\b0  test; if the target\rquote s will is overcome, he or she is compelled to remain in close proximity to the area where the mental control was initiated. Once controlled, a dominated human can be mentally contacted by the entity regardless of where it is, anywhere on Earth. This communication costs the entity 1 Willpower Point.\par
\b Regeneration:\b0  Regenerates 2 HP per turn after being wounded; if the entity\rquote s HP ever reach zero it is dead and will not regenerate.\par
\pard\intbl\sa120\b Trans\u8208?dimensional Travel:\b0  The entity has an innate ability to travel between different dimensions. Initiating a transition from our dimension to another takes a full (uninterrupted) turn and costs the entity 4 Willpower Points. If the entity is holding anything or anyone (e.g., someone held via a previous pin action), they too make the journey.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx10797\pard\intbl\keep\keepn\s3\sb120\sa120\cf2\b\f0 Some Example Special Vulnerabilities\par
\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1 During a translation the GM might need to invent some game statistics for a creature\rquote s special vulnerability. Here are a few ideas that can be used as starting points for new inventions.\par
\b Hates the Light: \b0 The entity takes damage from exposure to light. Bright light inflicts 1 HP per turn; bright and dazzling light inflicts 3D6. Full daylight reduces the entity to a pile of grey ash. This damage ignores armor.\par
\b Poisoned by <Substance>: \b0 The entity\rquote s metabolism is particularly susceptible to a common earthly substance. Whenever the entity comes into direct physical contact with the substance it must make a \b CON\'d75\b0  test; if it fails, the entity suffers Lethality 10% damage. \par
\pard\intbl\sa120\b Susceptible to Fire:\b0  Fire inflicts \i double\i0  damage to the entity. This damage ignores armor.\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s1\fi-432\li432\sb480\sl276\slmult1\cf1\b\f0\fs28 13.0\tab Gumshoe Creature Conversions\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Creature stat-blocks in Gumshoe are relatively brief, consisting of ratings for: Athletics, Health, Scuffling, Hit Threshold, Alertness Modifier, Stealth Modifier, Weapon, Armor, and sometimes Stability Loss. The tables below give a (rough) idea of how these ratings can be carried across to \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  creature statistics. Because Gumshoe is quite a different system, some creativity will be required to fill in statistics like INT, POW, etc. since Gumshoe typically doesn\rquote t measure such attributes for creatures.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.1\tab Athletics Rating\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 In general, a creature can be assumed to have a \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Athletics skill equal to its Gumshoe Athletics rating \'d7 12%. Physical statistics like STR, DEX, and CON can \endash  if needed \endash  be inferred from this. A higher Gumshoe Athletics rating almost certainly means one or more of those stats will be well above average.\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.2\tab Health Rating\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 In general, a creature in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  will have 2 Hit Points for every single point of Gumshoe Health Rating. For example, a Gumshoe monstrosity with a Health Rating of 10 will have 20 HP in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0 .\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.3\tab Scuffling and Weapon\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 The chance that a \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  version of an attack will hit its target is usually given by the Gumshoe Scuffling rating \'d7 4%. \par
For damage associated with an attack see table below.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl Gumshoe Weapon Rating\cell\i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Damage Dealt\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl -3 Damage\cell 1 HP\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl -2 Damage\cell Either 1D3 HP or 1D4 HP\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl -1 Damage\cell 1D6 HP\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl +0 Damage\cell 1D8 HP\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl +1 Damage\cell Either 1D8+1HP, 1D10 HP, or 2D6 HP\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl +2 Damage\cell Either 3D6 HP, 4D6 HP, or Lethality 10%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl +3 Damage\cell Lethality: 15%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl +5 Damage\cell Lethality: 20%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2552\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6379\pard\intbl +12 Damage\cell Lethality: 40%\cell\row\pard\sl276\slmult1\par
\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.4\tab Hit Threshold and Armor\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6096\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Gumshoe Hit Threshold\cell\i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Skill in Dodge\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6096\pard\intbl 2\cell\i 0 (Attacker gains +40% chance to hit)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6096\pard\intbl\i0 3\cell 15% (easier than normal to hit)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6096\pard\intbl 4\cell 30% (average difficulty to hit)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6096\pard\intbl 5\cell 50% (harder than average to hit)\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx6096\pard\intbl 6\cell 75% (much harder than average to hit)\cell\row\pard\sl276\slmult1\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl Gumshoe Armor Rating\cell\i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Armor Stat\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -1\cell 1 point\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -2\cell 2 points\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -3\cell 3 or 4 points\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -4\cell 5, 6, or 7 points*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -5\cell 8\emdash 11 points*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -6\cell 12\emdash 16 points*\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl -7\cell 17\emdash 22 points*\cell\row\pard * Rating may indicate that the creature is \b HUGE\b0  (see page \lang3081 58\lang1033 ), \b TRANSCENDENT \b0 (see page \lang3081 58\lang1033 ), or have some form of \b REDUCED SUSCEPTIBILITY TO LETHAL DAMAGE\b0  (see page \lang3081 84\lang1033 ).\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.5\tab Stability Loss\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Gumshoe Stability Loss\cell\i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  SAN Loss\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 1 point\cell SAN Loss of 0/1\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 2 points\cell SAN Loss of 0/1D3\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 3 points\cell SAN Loss of 1/1D4 \cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 4 points\cell SAN Loss of 1/1D6\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 5 points\cell SAN Loss of 1/1D10\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 6 points\cell SAN Loss of 1D6/1D20\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 7 points\cell SAN Loss of 1D8/2D20\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl 8 points\cell SAN Loss of 1D10/1D100\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.6\tab Stealth Modifier\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 In general, a creature\rquote s ability to avoid detection is measured in \i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  in terms of its Stealth skill rating; if a sentient (likely humanoid) creature has a sneaky kind of ability that would be better modelled by the Disguise skill, substitute that skill instead in the table below.\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl Gumshoe Stealth Modifier\cell\i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Skill in Stealth\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl +1\cell 30%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl +2\cell 60%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl +3\cell 90%\cell\row\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\par
\pard\keep\keepn\s2\fi-576\li576\sb200\sl276\slmult1\cf2\b\f0\fs26 13.7\tab Alertness Modifier\par
\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clcbpat6\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl\cf0\b0\f1\fs22 Gumshoe Alertness Modifier\cell\i Cthulhu Eternal\i0  Skill in Alertness\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl +1\cell 30%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl +2\cell 60%\cell\row\trowd\trgaph108\trleft5\trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3
\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx2410\clbrdrl\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrt\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrr\brdrw10\brdrs\clbrdrb\brdrw10\brdrs \cellx4962\pard\intbl +3\cell 90%\cell\row\pard\keep\keepn\s1\cf1\f9\fs32 Open Gaming License v. 1.0a\par
\pard\cf0\f1\fs16 The following text is the property of Wizards of the Coast, Inc. and is Copyright 2000 Wizards of the Coast, Inc (\ldblquote Wizards\rdblquote ). All Rights Reserved.\par
\b 1. Definitions: \b0 (a) \ldblquote Contributors\rdblquote  means the copyright and/or trademark owners who have contributed Open Game Content; (b) \ldblquote Derivative Material\rdblquote  means copyrighted material including derivative works and translations (including into other computer languages), potation, modification, correction, addition, extension, upgrade, improvement, compilation, abridgment or other form in which an existing work may be recast, transformed or adapted; (c) \ldblquote Distribute\rdblquote  means to reproduce, license, rent, lease, sell, broadcast, publicly display, transmit or otherwise distribute; (d) \ldblquote Open Game Content\rdblquote  means the game mechanic and includes the methods, procedures, processes and routines to the extent such content does not embody the Product Identity and is an enhancement over the prior art and any additional content clearly identified as Open Game Content by the Contributor, and means any work covered by this License, including translations and derivative works under copyright law, but specifically excludes Product Identity. (e) \ldblquote Product Identity\rdblquote  means product and product line names, logos and identifying marks including trade dress; artifacts; creatures characters; stories, storylines, plots, thematic elements, dialogue, incidents, language, artwork, symbols, designs, depictions, likenesses, formats, poses, concepts, themes and graphic, photographic and other visual or audio representations; names and descriptions of characters, spells, enchantments, personalities, teams, personas, likenesses and special abilities; places, locations, environments, creatures, equipment, magical or supernatural abilities or effects, logos, symbols, or graphic designs; and any other trademark or registered trademark clearly identified as Product identity by the owner of the Product Identity, and which specifically excludes the Open Game Content; (f) \ldblquote Trademark\rdblquote  means the logos, names, mark, sign, motto, designs that are used by a Contributor to identify itself or its products or the associated products contributed to the Open Game License by the Contributor (g) \ldblquote Use\rdblquote , \ldblquote Used\rdblquote  or \ldblquote Using\rdblquote  means to use, Distribute, copy, edit, format, modify, translate and otherwise create Derivative Material of Open Game Content. (h) \ldblquote You\rdblquote  or \ldblquote Your\rdblquote  means the licensee in terms of this agreement.\par
\b 2. The License: \b0 This License applies to any Open Game Content that contains a notice indicating that the Open Game Content may only be Used under and in terms of this License. You must affix such a notice to any Open Game Content that you Use. No terms may be added to or subtracted from this License except as described by the License itself. No other terms or conditions may be applied to any Open Game Content distributed using this License.\par
\b 3. Offer and Acceptance: \b0 By Using the Open Game Content You indicate Your acceptance of the terms of this License.\par
\b 4. Grant and Consideration: \b0 In consideration for agreeing to use this License, the Contributors grant You a perpetual, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive license with the exact terms of this License to Use, the Open Game Content.\par
\b 5. Representation of Authority to Contribute: \b0 If You are contributing original material as Open Game Content, You represent that Your Contributions are Your original creation and/or You have sufficient rights to grant the rights conveyed by this License.\par
\b 6. Notice of License Copyright: \b0 You must update the COPYRIGHT NOTICE portion of this License to include the exact text of the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any Open Game Content You are copying, modifying or distributing, and You must add the title, the copyright date, and the copyright holder\rquote s name to the COPYRIGHT NOTICE of any original Open Game Content you Distribute.\par
\b 7. Use of Product Identity: \b0 You agree not to Use any Product Identity, including as an indication as to compatibility, except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of each element of that Product Identity. You agree not to indicate compatibility or co-adaptability with any Trademark or Registered Trademark in conjunction with a work containing Open Game Content except as expressly licensed in another, independent Agreement with the owner of such Trademark or Registered Trademark. The use of any Product Identity in Open Game Content does not constitute a challenge to the ownership of that Product Identity. The owner of any Product Identity used in Open Game Content shall retain all rights, title and interest in and to that Product Identity.\par
\b 8. Identification: \b0 If you distribute Open Game Content You must clearly indicate which portions of the work that you are distributing are Open Game Content.\par
\b 9. Updating the License: \b0 Wizards or its designated Agents may publish updated versions of this License. You may use any authorized version of this License to copy, modify and distribute any Open Game Content originally distributed under any version of this License.\par
\b 10 Copy of this License: \b0 You MUST include a copy of this License with every copy of the Open Game Content You Distribute.\par
\b 11. Use of Contributor Credits: \b0 You may not market or advertise the Open Game Content using the name of any Contributor unless You have written permission from the Contributor to do so.\par
\b 12. Inability to Comply: \b0 If it is impossible for You to comply with any of the terms of this License with respect to some or all of the Open Game Content due to statute, judicial order, or governmental regulation then You may not Use any Open Game Material so affected.\par
\b 13. Termination: \b0 This License will terminate automatically if You fail to comply with all terms herein and fail to cure such breach within 30 days of becoming aware of the breach. All sublicenses shall survive the termination of this License.\par
\b 14. Reformation: \b0 If any provision of this License is held to be unenforceable, such provision shall be reformed only to the extent necessary to make it enforceable.\par
\b\fs17 15. COPYRIGHT NOTICE\par
\pard\fi-284\li721\b0 Open Game License v. 1.0, \'a9 2000, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.\par
\i Legend, \i0\'a9 2011, Mongoose Publishing.\par
\i Unearthed Arcana, \i0\'a9 2004, Wizards of the Coast, Inc.\par
\i Delta Green: Agent\rquote s Handbook, \i0\'a9 2016, Dennis Detwiller, Christopher Gunning, Shane Ivey, and Greg Stolze.\par
\i Delta Green: Handler\rquote s Guide, \i0\'a9 2017, Dennis Detwiller, Adam Scott Glancy, Kenneth Hite, Shane Ivey, and Greg Stolze.\i\par
APOCTHULHU Quickstart,\i0  \'a9 2020, Dean Engelhardt, Chad Bowser, Jo Kreil, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers.\par
\i APOCTHULHU Core Rules\i0  \'a9 2020, Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, Christopher Smith Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O\rquote Neil, Paul Franzese, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers.\par
\i APOCTHULHU System Reference Document v0.666\i0  \'a9 2020, Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, Christopher Smith Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O\rquote Neil, Paul Franzese, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers.\par
\i Cthulhu Eternal System Reference Document v1.0 \i0\'a9 2021, Dean Engelhardt, Jo Kreil, Kevin Ross, Jeff Moeller, Chad Bowser, Dave Sokolowski, Christopher Smith Adair, Fred Behrendt, Emily O\rquote Neil, Paul Franzese, and Michelle Bernay-Rogers.\par
\i Cthulhu Eternal \endash  \lang3081 Medieval Era\lang1033  Localization: System Reference Document v\lang3081 1\lang1033  \i0\'a9 \lang3081 2023\lang1033 , \lang3081 Chad J. Bowser\lang1033\par
\pard\b PRODUCT IDENTITY: \b0 The following items are hereby identified as Product Identity, as defined in the Open Gaming License Version 1.0a, Section 1(e), and are not Open Game Content: The name \ldblquote Cthulhu Eternal\rdblquote  and the Cthulhu Eternal logo (except as it appears on the supplied character sheet).\par
\b OPEN GAME CONTENT: \b0 The following items are hereby designated as Open Gaming Content under the terms of the Open Game License Version 1.0a, Section 1(d): all text, tables, and character sheets are considered Open Content except for the name \ldblquote Cthulhu Eternal\rdblquote  appearing anywhere other than on the supplied character sheet. If you would like to use the term \ldblquote Cthulhu Eternal\rdblquote  in another fashion within a product, please contact Cthulhu Reborn at \lang3081\fs22{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "mailto:inquiry@cthulhureborn.com" }}{\fldrslt{\cf4\lang1033\ul\fs17 inquiry@cthulhureborn.com}}}\cf0\ulnone\f1\fs17  to obtain written permission prior to publication.\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\fs22\par
\pard\sa200\sl276\slmult1\qr\par
}
 